Testing the `home market eect' in a multi-country world
Kristian Behrens Andrea R. Lamorgesey
Gianmarco I.P. Ottavianoz Takatoshi Tabuchix
August 16, 2005
Abstract
We extend Krugman's (1980) two-country two-sector model to a setup with arbitrary
numbers of countries and sectors. The extended model predicts an adequately dened
`home market eect' only after controlling for cross-country dierential accessibility through
a theory-based linear lter.
We bring that prediction to data by running a battery of non-parametric sign- and rank-
tests that are closely related to those used in factor proportions theory. When applied to
production and trade data on a cross-section of OECD and non-OECD countries, we nd
support for the presence of `home market eects' in a broad number of industries.
Keywords: home market eect; new trade theory; multi-country models; market potential;
economic geography
JEL Classication: D58; F12; F17; R12
Acknowledgments: We wish to thank A. Anas, M. Brulhart, M. Bugamelli, D. Davis, L. Gold-
berg, G. Grossman, K. Head, E. Helpman, T. Mayer, P. Monfort, C. Michelot, S. Redding,
Y. Sato, F. Schivardi, F. Trionfetti, J. Sudekum, D. Weinstein, as well as seminar participants
at CORE Universite catholique de Louvain, Osaka University, Princeton University, FEMES
2004, ERWIT 2004, HWWA Hamburg, the RSAI North-American Meetings 2004 in Seattle,
Academia Sinica, and the CEPRWorkshop on `Agglomeration Economies and Regional Growth'
in Sardinia for helpful comments and discussions.
We also wish to thank T. Mayer and S. Zignago for letting us use the production, trade, and
distance database developed at CEPII; and W. Koch for helping us construct the 2000 sample.
The rst and fourth authors acknowledge nancial support from the Japanese Ministry of
Education and Science (Grant-in-Aid for Science Research 13851002) and CORE Universite
catholique de Louvain. The third author acknowledges nancial support from MIUR and the
University of Bologna.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reect
those of the Bank of Italy.
The usual disclaimer applies.
CORE, Universite catholique de Louvain (Belgium).
yResearch Department, Bank of Italy (Italy).
zUniversita di Bologna (Italy), FEEM, and CEPR.
xFaculty of Economics, University of Tokyo (Japan).
1
1 Introduction
What determines the structure of world trade? Two main explanations have been put forth
in the literature (see, e.g., Helpman, 1998). The rst one highlights the role of relative cost
dierences between countries: a country exports the goods that it is able to produce at relatively
lower costs. The uneven international distribution of technology (Ricardian model) and/or
relative factor endowments (Heckscher-Ohlin model) would generate those dierences (Dixit
and Norman, 1980). The second explanation stresses the role of increasing returns to scale,
product dierentiation, and market structure: a country exports the goods for which it oers a
relatively large local demand, an outcome known as the `home market eect' (henceforth, HME;
Krugman, 1980). Although some kind of imperfect competition is needed for an industry to
possibly exhibit a HME, both oligopoly and monopolistic competition may serve the purpose,
provided entry and exit of rms are unrestricted (Feenstra et al., 2001; Head et al., 2002;
Feenstra, 2003).
As shown by Helpman and Krugman (1985), the two explanations are not incompatible.
Yet, the rst seems better t for explaining inter-sectoral trade between somewhat dierent
countries, whereas the second looks more suited to account for intra-sectoral trade between
similar countries. In particular, it has been argued that the former would explain North-South
trade, whereas the latter would account for North-North trade, together more than 80 per cent
of world trade ows. Nonetheless, the relative merits of the two explanations are still largely
debated, as highlighted by recent empirical works (see, e.g., Davis and Weinstein, 1996, 1999,
2003; Trionfetti, 2001; Antweiler and Treer, 2002; Brulhart and Trionfetti, 2005). The reason
is that relative costs matter also for North-North ows, and product dierentiation is relevant
also for North-South ows.
A major obstacle to assessing the empirical relevance of explanations based on economies of
scale, product dierentiation, and market structure is the fact that the inherent richness of the
corresponding models has not yet been much explored (Helpman, 1998). A recent example of
how theory still lags behind empirics is provided by the investigation of the HME by Davis and
Weinstein (2003). Their point of departure is the framework developed by Krugman (1980),
which features a two-country economy with one factor of production (labor) and two sectors.
One sector supplies a freely-traded homogeneous good under constant returns to scale and per-
fect competition, whereas the other sector produces a horizontally dierentiated good under
increasing returns and monopolistic competition a la Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). For each dier-
entiated variety, xed and marginal input requirements are constant and international trade is
hampered by frictional trade costs of the `iceberg' type. Preferences are Cobb-Douglas across
the two goods and symmetric CES between varieties of the dierentiated good. Due to the xed
input requirement, the larger country supports in equilibrium the production of a more than
proportionate number of dierentiated varieties, thus being a net exporter of this good (Helpman
and Krugman, 1985). In other words, Krugman's (1980) model displays a HME.
Trionfetti (2001) and Davis and Weinstein (2003) point out that no HME would arise instead
in a Ricardian or Heckscher-Ohlin world. Specically, when there are trade costs, increases
in market size map into a less than proportional increase of production, since a fraction of
the additional demand is served by imports from the rest of the world. Accordingly, Davis
and Weinstein suggest to compare the predictive power of the two alternative explanations by
estimating the impacts of aggregate demand on the output of dierent sectors. A more than
proportional causation from demand to supply would support the HME as a driving force for
specialization and trade, whereas a less than proportional causation would support relative cost
and/or endowment driven patterns.
The problem with applying the foregoing idea to real data is that Krugman's clear-cut result
has been derived in a two-country setup only. Hence, the question arises as to whether it gener-
2
alizes to the case of multiple countries. As recently argued by Head and Mayer (2004, p. 2634,
our emphasis), this issue is dicult to tackle and poses some important problems:
\How do we construct demand measures in the presence of more than two countries? Indeed
how does one even formulate the home market eect hypothesis? The ratios and shares of
the theoretical formulations neglect third country eects."
The main reason why it is hard to formulate the HME hypothesis in a multi-country world
is that the appeal of a country as a production site seems to depend on both the relative
size of its domestic market (`attraction') and its relative proximity to all other foreign markets
(`accessibility'). This is highlighted by the empirical results in Davis and Weinstein (2003) who
show that rms are attracted towards countries exhibiting larger values of a composite index of
attraction and accessibility (which they call IDIODEM). This index is a heuristic measure of
the idiosyncratic demand facing producers in a certain country that takes into account not only
local demand but also demand from neighboring countries. Davis and Weinstein (2003) try to
interpret such nding in the light of Krugman's (1980) model. Specically, by analogy with the
two-country case, they conjecture that a larger than one estimate of the elasticity of output to
the IDIODEM index would provide evidence of the presence of the HME.1
The aim of the present paper is to take theory and empirics one step further by propos-
ing a theory-based approach to testing the HME prediction. By extending Krugman's (1980)
model to many countries, we show that the appeal of a country as a production site for rms
indeed depends on both attraction and accessibility. This happens because in equilibrium the
endogenous international distribution of rms is such that better attraction and accessibility are
oset by ercer competition (`repulsion'), until operating prots are equalized across countries.
Some properties of the two-country setup survive the multi-country extension. The so-called
`dominant market eect' and the `magnication eect' (see, e.g., Head et al., 2002; Baldwin
et al., 2003) remain valid, thus suggesting that several of the underlying mechanisms are quite
robust. Yet, the HME itself may not arise in the multi-country setting, thus refuting the `Davis-
Weinstein conjecture'. This is due to the fact that, once `third country eects' are taken into
account, an increase in one country's expenditure share may well map into a less than propor-
tionate increase in its output share as other countries `drain away' some rms. In more extreme
cases, an increase in the expenditure share may even lead to a decrease in industry share.
These results suggest a dierent route for testing the HME that focuses on a denition in
terms of `country rankings', which seems to be the only one that generalizes from a two-country
to a multi-country setting. In particular, we show that, according to the extended model, the
HME should be observed in reality only after correcting the actual industry distribution from
the impact of accessibility. We further show that such a correction can be achieved through
a simple theory-based linear lter. When applied to a cross-section of OECD and non-OECD
countries, the lter does improve the performance of HME predictions in terms of both `sign'
and `rank' tests.
All this is reminiscent of old debates in HOV theory: \the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem is
derived from a model of only two of each of goods, countries, and factors of production. It
is unclear what the theorem says should be true in the real world where there are many of
all three" (Deardor, 1984, p. 468, our emphasis). This inevitably aects applied work, since
most \papers that claim to present tests of the hypothesis have used intuitive but inappropriate
generalizations of the two  two model to deal with a multidimensional reality" (Bowen et al.,
1987, p. 791). As a solution, some authors have indeed suggested to use `sign' and `rank' tests
1Analogously, building on the observation that home-biased demand plays an important role in the real world
(see, e.g., Treer, 1995), Trionfetti (2001) as well as Brulhart and Trionfetti (2005) argue that the HME should
be identied as a disproportionate output reaction to idiosyncratic home-biased demand.
3
of the predictions based on comparative advantage and factor proportions (see, e.g., Bowen et
al., 1987; Feenstra, 2003; Choi and Krishna, 2004).
Our contribution should be seen as complementary to these works in that our main objective
is not to discriminate between `old' and `new' trade theory. Indeed, it is our contention that,
in order to discriminate between competing paradigms, one rst needs to test the predictive
power of each paradigm per se. While this has been abundantly done in the case of the factor
proportions model (see, e.g., Deardor, 1984; Bowen et al., 1987; Treer, 1995; Antweiler and
Treer, 2002), we still lack clear theory-based tests of new trade theory. One could argue that
the estimation of so-called gravity equations provides strong support in favor of the latter, but
this is hardly so since many alternative models will lead to gravity-like relationships (Deardor,
1998; Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004). Further, it should be kept in mind that imperfect
competition and increasing returns to scale may generate an uneven spatial distribution of
production factors, which themselves then generate a pattern of trade consistent with HOV
predictions (see, e.g., Amiti, 1998). Put dierently, it may be quite hard to determine from ex
post trade data alone whether `old' or `new' theories explain the observed ows.2
The remainder of the paper is divided into ve sections. The rst presents the multi-country
extension of the model by Krugman (1980) and characterizes the spatial equilibrium. The second
provides a denition of the multi-country HME, rst in a dynamic and then in a static sense. We
show that only the static denition generalizes appropriately to the multi-country setting. The
third relates the multi-country HME to the concepts of market potential and market size. We
discuss the eects of geography and present a methodology that allows us to separate `attraction'
from `accessibility'. The fourth presents some empirical results that support the existence of
a HME for a large number of industries, which highlights the importance of correcting for
accessibility. The fth nally concludes.
2 The model
The world economy consists of M countries and S + 1 industries, indexed by i = 1; 2; : : : ;M
and s = 1; 2; : : : ; S + 1. In what follows, subscripts and superscripts refer to countries and
industries respectively.3 Country i hosts an exogenously given mass of Li > 0 consumers, each
of them supplying one unit of labor inelastically. Hence, both the world population and the
world endowment of labor are given by L =
P
i Li. Labor is the only factor of production and
it is assumed to be internationally immobile.
2.1 Preferences and technologies
Preferences are dened over a set of S + 1 dierentiated goods, each provided as a continuum
of horizontally dierentiated varieties. The preferences of a typical resident of country i are
represented by the following utility function:
Ui =
Y
s
(Dsi )
s ; 0 < s < 1;
X
s
s = 1; (1)
where
Dsi =
2
4X
j
 Z
!2
s
j
dsji(!)
(s 1)=s d!
!35
s=(s 1)
2Several empirical studies have shown that \the standard HOV theory performs miserably" (Davis and Wein-
stein, 2001, p. 1444; see also Bowen et al., 1987; Treer, 1995). Although a modied version allowing for dierences
in technologies and tastes performs better (Treer, 1995; Davis and Weinstein, 2001; Antweiler and Treer, 2002;
Choi and Krishna, 2004), tests discriminating between `old' and `new' trade theory remain inconclusive until now.
3To simplify notation, summation ranges are henceforth omitted whenever there is no possible ambiguity.
4
is a CES sub-utility dened over the varieties of the horizontally dierentiated good s. In the
above expression, dsji(!) is the consumption in country i of variety ! of good s produced in
country j, and 
sj is the set of varieties produced in country j. The parameter 
s > 1 measures
both the own- and cross-price elasticities of demand for any variety of good s.
The production of any variety of the dierentiated good s takes place under internal increas-
ing returns to scale by a set of monopolistically competitive rms. This set is endogenously
determined in equilibrium by free entry and exit. We denote by nsi the mass of industry-s rms
located in country i, by N s =
P
i n
s
i the total mass of industry-s rms, and by N =
P
sN
s
the total mass of all rms in the global economy. The production technology of each industry-s
variety requires the same xed and constant marginal labor requirements, labeled F s and cs
respectively. The fact that these labor requirements are industry specic allows us to capture
the dierent technological constraints characterizing dierent industries.4 Increasing returns
to scale and costless product dierentiation yield a one-to-one relationship between rms and
varieties, so we will use the two terms interchangeably. As to trade barriers, the international
trade of any industry-s variety is subject to `iceberg' trade costs. Specically,  sji > 1 units have
to be shipped from country i to country j for one unit to reach its destination.
2.2 Market equilibrium
Given our assumptions, in equilibrium rms in each industry will dier only by the country
they are located in. Accordingly, to simplify notation, we drop the variety label ! from now
on. Then, the maximization of utility (1) subject to the budget constraint yields the following
demand in country j for an industry-s variety produced in country i:
dsij =
(psij)
 s
(P sj )
1 s
sEj; (2)
where psij is the delivered price of the variety, Ej is expenditures in country j, and P
s
j is the
industry-s CES price aggregate given by
P sj =
 X
k
nsk(p
s
kj)
1 s
!1=(1 s)
: (3)
Note that since (2) and (3) do not depend on industry r 6= s, the cross-price elasticities between
any two varieties of two dierent goods r and s are zero. Although this is obviously a somewhat
strong result, it matches the classical denition of industries used in industrial organization (see,
e.g., Trin, 1941). From an empirical point of view, such a property has the drawback that
it requires the data to be suciently aggregated to make inter-industry cross-price elasticities
negligible. Yet, it oers the advantage of allowing for an analysis on an industry-by-industry
basis.
Because of the iceberg trade costs, a typical industry-s rm established in country i has
to produce xsij = d
s
ij
s
ij units to satisfy nal demand d
s
ij in country j. The rm takes (2) into
account when maximizing its own prot:
si =
X
j
 
psijd
s
ij   wic
sxsij

  F s (4)
=
X
j
 
psij   wic
s sij
 (psij) s
(P sj )
1 s
sEj   F
s:
4Note that xed and variable costs are not country specic in our setup. Hence, we do not directly control
for either comparative or Ricardian advantages that play an important role in explaining some world trade ows
(see, e.g., Deardor, 1984; Treer, 1995). Such a setup is partly justied by the fact that technological dierences
seem to be too weak an explanation for intra-industry trade ows of the magnitude observed between the major
OECD countries (Grubel and Lloyd, 1975).
5
Prot maximization with respect to psij, taking P
s
j as given because of the continuum assumption,
then implies that the price per unit delivered is:
psij =
s
s   1
wic
s sij : (5)
Since, due to free entry and exit, prots have to be non-positive in equilibrium, (4) and (5) also
imply that industry-s rms' equilibrium scale of operation must satisfy:
X
j
dsij
s
ij 
F s(s   1)
cs
; (6)
i.e., total rm production inclusive of the amount of output lost in transit must be large enough
to cover xed costs.
Let sij  (
s
ij)
1 s be a measure of trade freeness, valued one when trade is free and limiting
zero when trade is prohibitively costly. Replacing (2) as well as (3) into (6), multiplying both
sides by psii > 0, and using (5) as well as the identity Ej = Ljwj, we then get:
X
j
w 
s
i 
s
ijLjwjP
k w
1 s
k 
s
kjn
s
k

sF s
s
(7)
for i = 1; 2 : : : ;M and s = 1; 2; : : : ; S+1. Note that if (7) holds as a strict inequality for country
j, (nsj)
 = 0 in equilibrium since no industry-s rm can break even there.
The conditions (7) dene M  (S + 1) equations in M  (S + 2) unknowns (the industry
distributions nsi and the wages wi). To solve them requires either one of the following two
approaches:
(i) to introduce M additional trade balance conditions which allow then to pin down all
variables; or
(ii) to assume there is a costlessly tradable good that allows for factor price equalization
(henceforth, FPE).
The rst approach is more realistic as it would allow us to account for the well-documented
empirical fact that factor prices are not equalized across countries. Taking such an approach,
however, would require us to analyze the so-called `wage equations', which are transcendental
and cannot be solved analytically (see, e.g., Fujita et al., p.55).5 Hanson and Xiang (2004)
have recently used the wage equations in a two-country setting to derive theoretical predictions
about the HME when there is a continuum of industries that dier with respect to the degree of
product dierentiation and trade costs. Unfortunately, it is unclear whether any general results
can be derived once we allow for an arbitrary number of countries. Thus, after stressing the
usual caveat about FPE assumptions, we prefer to restrict ourselves to the second approach.
Accordingly, our ndings should be considered as complementary to those derived by Hanson
and Xiang (2004).
Assume that good S+1 can be freely traded, i.e.,  S+1ij = 
S+1
ij  1 for all countries i and j.
6
By symmetry, all rms then charge the same mill price everywhere. Given (5), this implies that
the equilibrium wage is the same everywhere as long as sector S+1 operates in all countries (see
Appendix 1 for the formal conditions). We can then set wi  1 for all i by choice of numeraire,
which allows us to get rid of the wages in equation (7).
5Recent empirical work in international trade and economic geography drawing on the wage equations include
Redding and Venables (2004), Hanson and Xiang (2004), and Hanson (2005).
6In modeling sector S + 1 as frictionless, we have in mind some IT related activities, e.g. internet services,
that face almost zero transportation costs for delivering their (mostly digital) dierentiated products. Trade costs
for such activities are subsumed in the xed costs of operating expensive telecommunication systems, whereas
marginal transport costs are almost equal to zero. Yet, one should note that such rms may face `indirect' trade
impediments under the form of VAT and sales taxes.
6
Multiplying both sides of (7) by the positive ni's and summing across countries, we get
N s = sL=F ss: in equilibrium the world mass of industry-s rms is constant and proportional
to world population (note that this does not necessarily hold for industry S + 1). This allows
us to rewrite (7) in terms of shares. In particular, after dening i  Li=L and 
s
i  n
s
i=N
s,
condition (7) for non-positive prots becomes:
RMPsi 
X
j
sijjP
k 
s
kj
s
k
 1; i = 1; 2; : : : ;M s = 1; 2; : : : S (8)
where RMPsi denotes the real market potential (henceforth, RMP) in country i and industry s
(see Head and Mayer, 2004). The equilibrium conditions (8) can then be expressed as follows:
RMPsi = 1 if 
s
i > 0;
RMPsi  1 if 
s
i = 0: (9)
Stated dierently, in equilibrium the RMP is equalized across all countries hosting a positive
measure of rms. The reason is that free entry and exit make sure that the cross-country
variations in attractiveness to rms in terms of distance-weighted demand are exactly capitalized
in the cross-country variations of local price indices.7 Specically, in (8) the expenditures in
countries j = 1; 2; : : : ;M that can be tapped from country i are assigned weights that decrease
with bilateral distance (inversely measured by sij) and with the intensity of local competition
(directly measured by
P
k 
s
kj
s
k, itself an inverse transformation of the local price index dened
in (3)). Therefore, (8) and (9) show that in equilibrium lower local price indices (i.e. tougher local
competition) must oset any locational advantage in terms of proximity to consumer demand.
2.3 Matrix notation and spatial equilibrium
A spatial equilibrium in industry s is a vector s satisfying conditions (9). The rm shares si
are M endogenous unknowns whereas the expenditure shares i, as well as the trade freeness
measures sij , are exogenous parameters. From now on, we set 
s
ii = 1 meaning that trade is
free within countries. We also set sij = 
s
ji, thus implying that trade ows between any given
pair of countries are subject to the same frictions in both directions.
Let us make notation of (9) more compact by recasting it in matrix form. Specically, let
s 
0
BBB@
s11 
s
12    
s
1M
s21 
s
22    
s
2M
...
...
. . .
...
sM1 
s
M2    
s
MM
1
CCCA ; s 
0
BBB@
s1
s2
...
sM
1
CCCA and  
0
BBB@
1
2
...
M
1
CCCA ;
where (s)T1 = T1 = 1 (in what follows, 1 stands for the M -dimensional vector whose com-
ponents are all equal to one and T denotes the transpose operator). Using these denitions, the
M equilibrium conditions (9) can be expressed in matrix notation as follows:
RMPs = sdiag(ss) 1  1; (10)
with the complementary slackness conditions
(RMPsi   1)
s
i = 0 i = 1; 2; : : : M:
7For any (interior) equilibrium distribution s, rms have no incentive to relocate because the RMP is the same
everywhere. Yet, the RMP diers across countries for o-equilibrium distributions. In this case, rms relocate
from low to high RMP countries, which is the usual adjustment dynamics used in new economic geography (see,
e.g., Fujita et al., 1999).
7
In expression (10), the `numerator' term s highlights the role of the distance-weighted ex-
penditure that can be served from each country. This measure is our counterpart to Davis and
Weinstein's (2003) IDIODEM index. The `denominator' term diag(ss) captures the role of
the distance-weighted supply that can serve each national market, which is a measure of the
intensity of local competition. Then, in equilibrium, the cross-country distribution of rms is
such that endogenous average supply exactly matches exogenous average expenditure for all
countries hosting some rms, whereas the latter falls short of the former for countries hosting
no rms.
It is of interest to note that (10) depends on industry-s variables only, which allows for an
industry-by-industry analysis. In Appendix 2, we prove the following result:
Proposition 1 (existence, uniqueness and stability) Assume that factor prices are equal-
ized. Then a unique and globally stable equilibrium exists for all industries s = 1; 2; : : : S for all
admissible values of  and s.
Note that Proposition 1 encompasses both interior and corner equilibria. To the best of our
knowledge, such a result has not been formally shown to hold for Krugman's (1980) model until
now.
Since any general characterization of the corner equilibria leads to a prohibitively com-
plex taxonomy, even in `low dimensional' cases, in what follows we focus on interior equilib-
ria only (i.e. equilibria in which si > 0 for all countries i = 1; 2; : : : ;M and all industries
s = 1; 2; : : : ; S + 1). Thus, condition (10) holds as an equality for all industries except S + 1.
Let 's  (s) 11, which can be interpreted as a vector of inverse measures of countries'
average accessibility in industry s.8 Using condition (10), an interior spatial equilibrium s is
then as follows:
 = diag('s)ss: (11)
If we denote by f sij the cofactor of 
s
ij and by j
sj the determinant of s, (11) can nally be
written component by component as
i = '
s
i
X
j
sij
s
j =
P
k f
s
ik
jsj
X
j
sij
s
j ; (12)
which is simply the i-th row of expression (11). A necessary condition for an interior solution
to exist can then be obtained by rewriting (12) as:
i = '
s
i
X
j
sij
s
j < '
s
i
X
j
sj = '
s
i ;
where the inequality results from 0 < sij < 1 and where the last equality is due to the fact
that the si 's sum up to one. Provided such an interior equilibrium exists, the equilibrium
distribution of rms is given by
s =

diag((s) 11)s
 1
; (13)
or, component by component, by:
si =
X
j
f sijP
k f
s
jk
sj : (14)
Since s is by assumption a symmetric matrix, f sij = f
s
ji holds for all i and j. Observe that (14)
shows that the relationship between s and  is linear for any interior solution.
8See Behrens et al. (2004) for sucient conditions for the freeness of trade matrix s to be invertible.
8
Finally, the industry share of the numeraire industry 
(S+1)
i is computed as a residual as
follows:

(S+1)
i =
1
S+1
 
i  
X
s
ssi
!
: (15)
Of course, since FPE is assumed to hold and since the shares sum to one, we then have 0 <

(S+1)
i < 1 for all i (see Appendix 1).
3 Dening the multi-country HME
Although the concept of HME has been widely used in both theory and applications, we still lack
a clear and general denition of what exactly a HME is in a multi-country context. In Krugman's
(1980, p. 955) own words, in sectors characterized by Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition
\countries will tend to export those kinds of products for which they have relatively large
domestic demand". This property is neatly implied by two-country models. Indeed, Helpman
and Krugman (1985) show in such a model that the larger country hosts a more than proportional
share of the monopolistically competitive industry. Given preferences that are homothetic and
identical across countries, such a pattern of production makes the larger country a net exporter
of the dierentiated good.
The disproportionate positive causation from demand to supply has become the standard
denition of the HME. Thus, a natural starting point is to investigate whether we can generalized
it from both a dynamic (i.e., time-series) and a static (i.e., cross-sectional) point of view. Head
et al. (2002) have shown that the static and dynamic denitions are equivalent in the symmetric
2  2-setting, thus making the choice immaterial in this case. As we will show, only the static
denition can be meaningfully generalized when there are more than two countries.
3.1 Dynamic denition
A dynamic denition of the HME is often presented in two-country models and has been used in
the empirical literature. It builds on the observation that, in the presence of the HME, changes
in expenditure shares map into more than proportional changes in industry shares, i.e., there is
\a more than one-for-one movement of production in response to idiosyncratic demand" (Davis
and Weinstein, 2003, p.7).
More formally, assume that country i hosts an industry share at period t that is proportional
to its expenditure share, which can be expressed as (i )
t = ktti (we omit the industry index s
to alleviate notation). Assume that in the following period t+1, all j 's have changed such that
t+1i  
t
i > 0 and
X
j
 
t+1j  
t
j

= 0;
so that the new equilibrium industry share is given by (i )
t+1 = kt+1t+1i . In the presence of
a dynamic HME, the disproportionate positive causation from demand to supply requires that
kt+1 > kt whenever t+1i > 
t
i . Hence,
(i )
t+1
t+1i
= kt+1;
(i )
t
ti
= kt and kt+1 > kt )
(i )
t+1
t+1i
>
(i )
t
ti

Switching to dierential notation, the last condition can be expressed as
i+d

i
i+di
>
i
i
)
di
di
i
i
> 1:
This suggests quite naturally the following denition for the dynamic HME (henceforth, DHME):
9
Denition 1 (Dynamic Home Market Eect) A monopolistically competitive industry ex-
hibits a DHME in country i at the distribution  and for the perturbation d if and only if
di
di
i
i
> 1; (16)
where d is a small variation satisfying di > 0 and
P
jdj = 0.
Unfortunately, condition (16) is an inappropriate denition of the HME when there are more
than two countries since, as shown in Appendix 3, there always exists a perturbation d such that
it does not hold. Therefore, it is generally `impossible' to dene the HME in terms of changes in
expenditure shares in a multi-country world, i.e., the disproportionate causation from demand
to supply may not show up in the data even though it may be generated by the theoretical
model. We hence discard this denition and adopt an alternative one in the remainder of this
paper.
3.2 Static denition
While the DHME relates to the time-series disproportionality between two periods in the same
country, the static HME (henceforth, SHME) relates to the cross-sectional disproportionality
between two countries at the same time. Accordingly, we derive the static denition in a way
analogous to the one used in the previous section.
Assume that countries i and j host an industry share that is proportional to their expenditure
share, i.e.,
i = kii and 

j = kjj;
where ki and kj are positive coecients. In the presence of a SHME, the disproportionate
positive causation from demand to supply requires that ki  kj whenever i  j. Hence,
i
i
= ki;
j
j
= kj and ki  kj )
i
i

j
j

This suggests the following denition:
Denition 2 (Static Home Market Eect) A monopolistically competitive industry exhibits
a SHME in country i at the expenditure distribution  if and only if
i  j )
i
i

j
j
; 8j = 1; : : : ;M (17)
with i =i > 

j=j if and only if i > j.
In what follows, we say that the global economy exhibits a SHME if condition (17) holds for
all countries i. Specically, assuming, without loss of generality, that country labels are ordered
such that 1  2  : : :  M , the global economy exhibits a SHME when
1
1

2
2
    
M
M
: (18)
Stated dierently, under a SHME there is no `industrial leap-frogging' in the global economy,
in the sense that smaller countries always host a relatively smaller share of the monopolistically
competitive industry. This implies that the ordering in terms of industry shares reects the
`natural' ordering in terms of countries' economic sizes.9
9A similar `no leap-frogging property' has been used in tests of the factor proportions theory. As noted by
Bowen et al. (1987, p.795), \for each country and factor, the ranking of adjusted net factor exports should
conform to the ranking of factors by their abundance". Quite surprisingly, this formal analogy between `classical'
and `new' trade theory has not been noticed until now.
10
4 Looking for the HME: a linear `accessibility'-lter
In bringing the model to data, it is crucial to understand that the model does not predict that the
equilibrium industry distribution  should always satisfy (18).10 The reason is that the appeal
of a country as a production site depends not only on the relative size of its domestic market
(`attraction') but also on its relative proximity to all other foreign markets (`accessibility'). Yet,
we show now that (18) will hold provided that all countries have the same access to world
markets. Stated dierently, once we correct for countries' dierential accessibility, the model
predicts a SHME. This nding will guide our empirical investigation in Section 5.
To see that the SHME arises in a world without accessibility dierences, assume that all
trade costs are symmetric and equal to the average trade cost among all countries. Denoting
the average freeness of trade in industry s by s and setting sij = 
s for all i 6= j, all countries
then have the same accessibility. In this case, expression (14) reduces to
(si )
size =
1 + (M   1)s
1  s
i  
s
1  s
; (19)
which is the share of rms that would locate in country i were all countries evenly spaced
at the same average distance from one another.11 It is readily veried that i > j implies
(si )
size=i > (
s
j)
size=j. This result shows that one should expect the SHME to appear in the
data only after controlling for cross-country dierences in accessibility.
But how can we control for these dierences in the rst place? We proceed as follows. First,
we dene a measure of accessibility, second we use it to sterilize the equilibrium rm distribution
from the impact of cross-country dierences in accessibility. Let us start by considering a
hypothetical world in which expenditures are equally spread across countries so that the location
of rms is solely driven by trade cost considerations. In this case i = 1=M for all i, so that (14)
reduces to
(si )
hub =
1
M
X
j
f sijP
k f
s
ik
=
1
M jsj
X
j
f sij
'sj
: (20)
Since (si )
hub depends on the sij 's only, we choose it as our theory-based denition of accessibility.
It is the share of rms that would locate in country i were world expenditures evenly distributed
across countries.
We are now equiped to decompose the equilibrium distribution of rms in terms of accessi-
bility (s)hub and attraction (s)size. In so doing, let
W s 

diag((s) 11)s
 1
and s 
1  s
1 + (M   1)s
:
Then, since s =W s and
(s)size =
1
s

  
1  s
M
1

and (s)hub =
1
M
W s1;
10See Behrens et al. (2004) for simple counterexamples.
11It is easy to show that
(s)size =  +
Ms
1  s

  
1
M
1

;
which is reminiscent of the estimating equation (3) by Davis and Weinstein (2003, p.7). The rst term stands for
the autarky share of industry, whereas the second term captures the idiosyncratic component of local demand.
Note, however, that the coecient capturing the idiosyncratic impact Ms=(1   s), though positive, need not
be larger than one in theory (see also Brulhart and Trionfetti, 2005). This undermines the restriction proposed
by Davis and Weinstein (2003, p.8) to identify the HME.
11
we get the following exact theoretical decomposition:
s = sW s(s)size + (1  s)(s)hub: (21)
Expression (21) is particularily appealing from an empirical point of view. SinceW s depends
on the freeness of trade only, it can be interpreted as a spatial weight matrix capturing the
complex interrelations between national market sizes. Therefore, (21) can be seen as providing
some theoretical foundation to the so far ad-hoc inclusion of spatial weight matrices in empirical
models.
To control for accessibility, we can invert the relationship (21) to obtain the value of s
predicted by the model in the absence of dierences in trade costs:
(s)size = (sW s) 1
h
s   (1  s)(s)hub
i
: (22)
Together with (20), expression (22) gives us a theory-based linear accessibility-lter to be applied
to the observed s. Stated dierently, before testing for the SHME, which is predicted by
the model only in terms of the unobserved (s)size, we have to lter the eect of dierential
accessibility.
5 Non-parametric tests of the HME
Our dataset consists in trade ows, industry-level value added, and GNP for 40 (resp., 52)
countries and 25 (resp., 27) manufacturing industries at the 3-digit ISIC level for the year 1990
(resp., 2000) (see Appendix 4 for a more detailed description of the dataset). Following Hanson
and Xiang (2004), we split the set of countries into two sub-groups which we label the treatment
and control group, respectively. The treatment group for 1990 consists of 20 OECD countries,
whereas the control group consists of 20 newly industrializing and developing countries that were
not members of the OECD in that same year. For the 2000 dataset, we also extract a treatment
group of 20 OECD countries. Due to problems of data availability, a reasonable control group
is not available for that year.
Our empirical strategy is to implement two analyses: (i) one focusing on the treatment
groups in 1990 and 2000; and (ii) one focusing on the control group in 1990. The underlying
logic is the following. Countries in the treatment group are characterized by roughly similar
high levels of economic development and relative factor endowments. According to the theory
(see, e.g., Dixit and Norman, 1980; Helpman and Krugman, 1985), trade ows between them
should mostly be of the intra-industry type and thus be better explained by increasing returns
and imperfect competition as featured by the model developed in the previous sections. The
countries of the control group exhibit both a lower average level of development and higher
heterogeneity in terms of relative factor endowments and per-capita GDP. Thus, with respect
to the treatment group, the importance of inter-industry trade in the control group should rise
and the explanatory power of our model should fall as it neglects the eects of technological
dierences and factor endowments.
5.1 Sign tests
In the empirical literature on international trade, non-parametric `sign tests' have been repeat-
edly used to check the predictive power of the factor proportions theory, according to which
countries export the goods that use relatively intensively their relatively abundant factors (see
Bowen et al., 1987; Feenstra, 2003). As noted by Treer (1995, p. 1029), the main conclusion
that must be drawn is that the basic factor proportions theory \performs horribly [since] factor
endowments predict the direction of factor service trade about 50 percent of the time, a success
12
rate that is matched by a coin toss". More recently, Choi and Krishna (2004) used another
`sign test' based on Helpman's (1984) result that the bilateral pattern of trade should reect the
fact that countries, on average, import the factors that are relatively more expensive at home
and export the factors that are relatively cheaper. Although the authors nd some strong em-
pirical support for this prediction, they acknowledge that their \tests provide only a statement
regarding the direction and magnitude of trade ows on average" (Choi and Krishna, 2004, p.
895).
In this section, we show that a similar methodology to the one used by Bowen et al. (1987)
as well as by Choi and Krishna (2004) may be used to test the predictive power of new trade
theory. Observe that, as shown in Sections 3 and 4, once we control for dierences in accessibility
Zsij 
 
(si )
size
si
 
(sj)
size
sj
! 
si   
s
j

 0 (23)
should hold for all country pairs i and j if industry s is subject to a SHME. The formal analogy
of (23) with the sign tests used in factor proportions theory is striking. Quite surprisingly, this
has been overlooked until now probably because all empirical work on the HME has focused
on the disproportionate causation from demand to supply in terms of intertemporal variations.
The use of condition (23) for a formal test oers two distinct advantages: (i) it circumvents
the theoretical diculties of the DHME highlighted in Section 3:1; and (ii) its results are more
easily comparable with the ones established in the factor proportions literature. While this does
not allow us, of course, to discriminate between the two paradigms, we may get a rough idea of
how good their relative predictions are.
As a rst indicator of the predictive power of the HME model, we use a similar approach
to the one adopted by Choi and Krishna (2004).12 Building on condition (23), the weakest sign
test of the HME theory is that
Zs 
MX
i=1
MX
j=1
 
(si )
size
si
 
(sj)
size
sj
! 
si   
s
j

 0
should hold at the industry level. Stated dierently, on average countries with larger expenditure
shares on good s host more than proportionate shares of industry s. We call the corresponding
check the `world average Z-test'. We compute Z s for all 25 industries using both the `unadjusted'
observed shares  as constructed from the data (see Appendix 4) and the `adjusted' unobserved
shares size that control for accessibility as in (22). Results for both the treatment and the
control group (not shown here) reveal that this weak prediction almost always holds when we
control for dierences in market access. Indeed, for the 1990 sample, whereas Z s is negative in
6 out of 25 cases when we use the unadjusted value of , it is only insignicantly negative in 1
out of 25 cases when we use size. For the 2000 sample, whereas Zs is negative in 11 out of 25
cases when we use the unadjusted value of , it is only insignicantly negative in 6 out of 25
cases when we use size. The theory is therefore strongly supported at such a weak test level.
A slightly stronger test of the HME prediction can be expressed as follows:
Zsi 
MX
j=1
 
(si )
size
si
 
(sj)
size
sj
! 
si   
s
j

 0 (24)
which states that on average, if country i has a larger expenditure share on good s than the other
countries, then it hosts a more than proportionate share of industry s. We call the corresponding
check the `country average Z-test'. The industry-level results for (24) are given in Tables 1 and
12See Appendix 5 for the distributional properties of all the test statistics we use.
13
4, respectively. As can be seen from Table 1, when we control for accessibility, the trade weighted
average percentage of correct signs is 81:7 per cent for the treatment group in 1990 (resp., 76:0
per cent in 2000), while it drops to 70 per cent for the 1990 control group. Thus, in the case of
OECD countries, there is strong support for the theoretical prediction that, on average, trade in
manufactures ows from countries with relatively larger local demand to countries with relatively
smaller local demand. Our percentages of correct signs are of the same order of magnitude as
those in Choi and Krishna (2004) for the 1990 sample, whereas the results are slightly worse, but
still good, for the year 2000. Therefore, on average both factor proportions and HME theories
deliver results that are roughly equally backed by the data at an aggregate level.
Unfortunately, the foregoing average sign tests are rather crude indicators of the explanatory
power of the theory. This is because many small negative observations that violate it may be
more than oset by a few large positive ones. To get rid of this potential problem, we push
disaggregation one step further. As shown in Sections 3 and 4, the theory predicts that the
observed industry distribution  should reect the country rankings in terms of expenditure 
once dierential accessibility is appropriately controlled for. Hence, the strongest sign test of
the HME prediction is
Zsij 
 
(si )
size
si
 
(sj)
size
sj
! 
si   
s
j

 0; (25)
which is (23) for M(M   1)=2 distinct country-combinations. It states that for each pair of
countries, if one country has a larger expenditure share on good s, then it hosts a more than
proportionate share of industry s. We call the corresponding check the `pairwise Z-test'. Notice
that passing from the `country average Z-test' (24) to the `pairwise Z-test' (25) amounts to
passing from average tests a la Choi and Krishna (2004) to disaggregated tests a la Bowen et
al. (1987). The crucial question then becomes: Does the success rate of HME-based predictions
exceed that of a coin toss?
Table 2 displays the industry-level results for the pairwise Z-tests (25) for the treatment and
control group in 1990, whereas Table 4 displays the analogous results for the 2000 treatment
group. Note rst that, quite surprisingly, even without controlling for dierences in accessibility,
the average percentage of correct predictions is about 64:4 (resp., 66:9) per cent for the trade
weighted mean. Therefore, it exceeds the success rate of a coin toss. Note further that, after
controlling for dierences in accessibility, the trade weighted mean of correct predictions is of
69:3 and 69:7 percent for the 1990 and the 2000 sample. Stated dierently, the spatially ltered
HME model correctly predicts the net trade ows of more than two-thirds of the observations. For
18 out of 25 industries, the percentage of correct predictions with the ltered data signicantly
exceeds 0:5 at the 5 per cent level in 1990 (resp., for 24 out of 27 industries in 2000). As can
be further seen from Table 2, the share of correct predictions decreases as expected for the
control group. Indeed, the arithmetic and the trade weighted percentages of correct predictions
decrease to 55:0 and 62:0 per cent respectively, which is closer to the coin-toss outcome than
for the treatment group. There are only 7 industries in which the correct predictions exceed
the `coin-toss' 50 per cent threshold at a 5 per cent signicance level for the unadjusted data,
whereas the number increases to 11 for the spatially ltered data. This shows that the average
rate of correct predictions is lower for pairs of non-OECD countries, which probably reects the
relative importance of technological dierences and relative factor endowments.
5.2 Rank tests
The strongest test of the SHME we develop in this paper goes beyond the sign tests by building
on Denition 2 in Section 3:2: Does the ranking of relative industry shares (si=i) match the
ranking of expenditure shares ( i) after controling for dierences in accessibility? To answer
14
this question, we compute the Spearman rank-correlation coecients between those two series
for all 25 industries on both the treatment and the control samples. The results are summarized
in Tables 3 and 4.
As can be seen from Table 3, for the OECD sample only ve coecients are slightly neg-
ative after controlling for accessibility. The other 20 rank-correlation coecients are positive.
Among them, 15 are statistically greater than zero at the 5 per cent level. In other words, the
SHME prediction is strongly supported for OECD countries after controlling for accessibility.
The comparision with the control group is of particular interest: it shows that for the control
group without controlling for accessibility, there is almost no correlation between market-size
and the pattern of trade (only 5 out of 25 coecients are statistically positive at the 5 per cent
level). Table 3 also shows that the prediction gets better once we control for accessibility. Yet,
the correlations remain much weaker than for the treatment group: only 7 coecients out of 25
are statistically greater than zero at the 5 per cent level, whereas 11 are even negative, which
runs plainly against the HME theory. Hence, expenditures predict the location of industry much
less eectively in the control than in the treatment sample, which may again signal the role of
technological dierences and relative factor endowments.
5.3 Sectoral patterns
So far, our data seem to provide strong support for the presence of the HME after correcting
for cross-country accessibility dierences, as required by the theoretical model. We now make
a further step and challenge the model in terms of its cross-sector predictions. Specically, our
model predicts that the HME should arise in sectors characterized by imperfect competition,
product dierentiation, and scale economies. Moreover, given the denition of trade freeness ,
the HME should vary in intensity across industries depending crucially on the degree of product
dierentiation () and the level of trade costs ().13
Table 5 summarizes some industry-level characteristics concerning the type of goods as well as
their R&D- and advertising-intensities building on existing taxonomies developed by Pagano and
Schivardi (2003), Rauch (1999), and Lyons and Sembenelli (1997). These taxonomies represent
our point of departure for a tentative classication of sectors in terms of their propensity to
exhibit a HME. In particular, sectors reported as homogenous or reference-priced by either
Rauch (1999) or Lyons and Sembenelli (1997), and exhibiting small R&D intensity according to
Pagano and Schivardi (2003), are classied as exhibiting `low HME-propensity'. Sectors reported
as dierentiated or heterogeneous, and having high R&D intensity, are classied as exhibiting
`high HME-propensity'. The remaining sectors are a priori uncertain.14 The outcome is the
three groups of sectors appearing in Table 6:
(i) `low HME-propensity': ISIC 311, 321, 322, 323, 324, 341, 342, 361, 369, 372 (`low');
(ii) `high HME-propensity': ISIC: 351, 352, 353, 355, 382, 383, 384, 385 (`high');
(iii) `uncertain': ISIC 313, 314, 331, 332, 356, 362, 371, 381, 390 (`uncertain').
How do these classications match our empirical ndings? Table 6 summarizes our results.
Columns 4{6 (`Observed') indicate for the 1990 and 2000 treatment (and the 1990 control)
groups whether the sign tests are at least signicant at a 5% level, before and after correcting
for accessibility. Column 7 is then constructed by applying a simple majority rule to columns
13See, e.g., Amiti (1998) and Hanson and Xiang (2004).
14In our classication we have exploited the fact that the correlation between the average trade freeness s in
each industry and the rst two columns in Table 5 is 0:702 and 0:616 respectively. In other words, high values of
R&D employment to total employment or R&D expenditure to value added also proxy high trade freeness.
15
4{6.15 First, we note that 10 sectors do not seem to exhibit a HME (ISIC 311, 313, 314, 321, 322,
323, 324, 331, 361, 369). These include sectors such as Food, Beverages, Textiles and Footwear,
which is in line with what one would expect. Note that the overlap with the a priori expectations
is strong, except for a few sectors. Second, 10 sectors can be unambiguously associated with
HMEs (ISIC 332, 351, 355, 356, 371, 382, 383, 384, 385, 390). These include Industrial chemicals,
Rubber products, Plastic products as well as Machinery, Transport equipment, and Scientic
instruments. Again the ndings conform to what we would expect a priori and the overlap
is signicant. Finally, 7 sectors remain uncertain (ISIC 341, 342, 352, 353, 362, 372, 381),
which include Other chemicals, Petroleum reneries, Glass and Products and Fabricated metal
products.
To conclude, we compare our sectoral ndings with related results in the literature. As
can be seen from the last two columns in Table 6, our predictions for HME sectors overlap
signicantly with the recent results by Brulhart and Trionfetti (2005), whereas the overlap with
Davis and Weinstein (2003) is much weaker. Since Brulhart and Trionfetti (2005) also rely on
an estimating equation that is shown to hold in a multi-country world, we view this as evidence
for the importance of correcting for accessibility and accounting for the global structure of world
trade when testing the importance of market size for trade patterns and industry location.
6 Conclusion
We have started with what we called the `Davis-Weinstein conjecture' (Davis and Weinstein,
2003). According to this conjecture, the HME uncovered in two-country models may be extended
to a multi-country world in a fairly straightforward way. Specically, with two countries, rms
are disproportionately located in the country oering the larger local demand. With many
countries, the same should happen with respect to some index of local `eective' demand. Such
index should take into account not only local demand per se but also demands derived from
other countries, weighted by some adequate measure of distance.
By developing a multi-country model a la Krugman (1980), we have shown that things are
unfortunately not that simple. In particular, as shown by Proposition 2 in Appendix 3, it is
quite dicult, perhaps impossible, to build an index of `eective' demand whose changes always
generate disproportionate responses with respect to output. The reason being that, with many
countries, the location of rms is determined by the interaction between spatial (`accessibility')
and non-spatial (`attraction') eects, which are crucially inuenced by what happens to the
entire distribution of demand across all countries (`third country eects'). These conceptual
diculties, however, do not imply the impossibility of assessing the role of product dierentiation
and market structure in shaping the structure of world trade. We propose, indeed, a series of
new theory-based non-parametric tests of the HME that are similar to the sign- and rank-
tests used in the applied factor proportions literature. Our main nding is that the empirical
evidence strongly backs the HME prediction: local market size crucially matters in explaining
and predicting observed trade ows, especially between OECD countries.
As our preliminary results do not allow us to reject the HME model as a possible explanation
for the structure of world trade, the next logical step is to take the model to the data with the help
of a more complete econometric analysis. In particular, our decomposition of the geographical
distribution of rms into `attraction' and `accessibility' components may turn out to be useful
for future econometric investigations.
15Sectors with more no's than yes' are of type (i); sectors with more yes' than no's, but not only yes, are of
type (iii); and sectors with only yes are of type (ii).
16
References
[1] Amiti, M. (1998) Inter-industry trade in manufactures: Does country size matter?, Journal
of International Economics 44, 231-255.
[2] Anderson, J.E. and E. van Wincoop (2004) Trade costs, Journal of Economic Literature
42, 691-751.
[3] Antweiler, W. and D. Treer (2002) Increasing returns and all that: a view from trade,
American Economic Review 92, 93-119.
[4] Baldwin, R.E., R. Forslid, Ph. Martin, G.I.P. Ottaviano and F. Robert-Nicoud (2003)
Economic Geography and Public Policy. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
[5] Behrens, K., A.R. Lamorgese, G.I.P. Ottaviano and T. Tabuchi (2004) Testing the `home
market eect' in a multi-country world: The theory. CEPR Discussion Paper 4468.
[6] Bowen, H.P., E.E. Leamer and L. Sveikauskas (1987) Multicountry, multifactor tests of the
factor abundance theory, American Economic Review 77, 791-809.
[7] Brulhart, M. and F. Trionfetti (2005) A test of trade theories when expenditure is home
biased. CEPR Discussion Paper n5097.
[8] Choi, Y.-S. and P. Krishna (2004) The factor content of bilateral trade: an empirical test,
Journal of Political Economy 112, 887-914.
[9] Davis, D. and D. Weinstein (1996) Does economic geography matter for international spe-
cialization, NBER Working Paper n5706.
[10] Davis, D. and D. Weinstein (1999) Economic geography and regional production structure:
an empirical investigation, European Economic Review 43, 379-407.
[11] Davis, D. and D. Weinstein (2001) An account of global factor trade, American Economic
Review 91, 1423-1453.
[12] Davis, D. and D. Weinstein (2003) Market access, economic geography and comparative
advantage: an empirical test, Journal of International Economics 59, 1-23.
[13] Deardor, A.V. (1984) Testing trade theories and predicting trade ows. In R.W. Jones
and P.B. Kenen (eds.) Handbook of International Economics, vol. 1. Amsterdam: North
Holland, pp. 467-517.
[14] Deardor, A.V. (1998) Determinants of bilateral trade: does gravity work in a neo-classical
world? In J.A. Frankel (ed.) The Regionalization of the World Economy. Chicago, IL: Univ.
of Chicago Press, pp. 7-32.
[15] Dixit, A. and J.E. Stiglitz (1977) Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity,
American Economic Review 67, 297-308.
[16] Dixit, A. and V. Norman (1980), Theory of International Trade: A Dual General Equilib-
rium Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
[17] Feenstra, R.E., J. Markusen and A. Rose (2001) Using the Gravity Equation to Dierentiate
Among Alternative Theories of Trade, Canadian Journal of Economics 34, 430-447.
[18] Feenstra, R.E. (2003) Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton Univ. Press.
17
[19] Feenstra, R.E. and G.H. Hanson (2004) Intermediaries in Entrepo^t Trade: Hong Kong
Re-Exports of Chinese Goods, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 13, 3-36.
[20] Fujita, M., P. Krugman and A.J. Venables (1999) The Spatial Economy. Cities, Countries
and International Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[21] Ginsburgh, V., Y.Y. Papageorgiou and J.-F. Thisse (1985) On existence and stability of
spatial equilibria and steady-states, Regional Science and Urban Economics 15, 149-158.
[22] Grubel, H. and P. Lloyd (1975) Intra-Industry Trade: The Theory and Measurement of
International Trade in Dierentiated Products. London: MacMillan.
[23] Hanson, G.H. and C. Xiang (2004) The home market eect and bilateral trade patterns.
Forthcoming in American Economic Review.
[24] Hanson, G.H. (2005) Market potential, increasing returns and geographic concentration.
Forthcoming in Journal of International Economics.
[25] Harris, C. (1954) The market as a factor in the localization of industry in the United States,
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 64, 315-348.
[26] Head, K., T. Mayer and J. Ries (2002) On the pervasiveness of home market eects, Eco-
nomica 69, 371-390.
[27] Head, K. and T. Mayer (2004) The empirics of agglomeration and trade. In V. Henderson
and J.-F. Thisse (eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4. Amsterdam:
North Holland, pp. 2609-2669.
[28] Helpman, E. (1984) The factor content of foreign trade, The Economic Journal 94, 84-94.
[29] Helpman, E. and P. Krugman (1985) Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
[30] Helpman, E. (1998) Explaining the structure of foreign trade, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv
134, 573-589.
[31] Kendall, M. and J. Gibbons (1990), Rank Correlation Methods, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
[32] Krugman, P. (1980) Scale economies, product dierentiation and the pattern of trade,
American Economic Review 70, 950-959.
[33] Krugman, P. (1991) Increasing returns and economic geography, Journal of Political Econ-
omy 99, 483-499.
[34] Krugman, P. (1993) The hub eect: or, threeness in international trade. In W.J. Ethier,
E. Helpman and J.P. Neary (eds.) Theory, Policy and Dynamics in International Trade.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Univ. Press, pp. 29-37.
[35] Lyons, B. and A. Sembenelli (1997) The European Union in context. In Lyons, B. and S.W.
Davies (eds.) The Industrial Organization in the European Union. Oxford, UK: Oxford Univ.
Press.
[36] Mayer, T. and S. Zignago (2004) Market Access in Global and Regional Trade, CEPII
Working Paper 2004-14.
18
[37] Pagano, P. and F. Schivardi (2003) Firm size distribution and growth, Scandinavia Journal
of Economics 105, 255-274.
[38] Pavitt, K. (1984) Patterns of technical change: towards a taxonomy and a theory, Research
Policy 13, 343-373.
[39] Rauch, J.E. (1999) Networks versus markets in international trade, Journal of International
Economics 48, 7-35.
[40] Redding, S. and A.J. Venables (2004) Economic geography and international inequality,
Journal of International Economics 62, 53-82.
[41] Rosen, J.B. (1965) Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave n-person
games, Econometrica 33, 520-534.
[42] Treer, D. (1995) The case of the missing trade and other mysteries, American Economic
Review 85, 1029-1046.
[43] Trin, R. (1941) Monopolistic Competition and General Equilibrium Theory. Cambrigde,
MA: Harvard Univ. Press
[44] Trionfetti, F. (2001) Using home-biased demand to test for trade theories,
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 137, 404-426.
Appendix 1: Factor price equalization
Factor price equalization requires any M   1 dimensional subset of countries to be unable
to satisfy world demand for the numeraire good (see, e.g., Baldwin et al., 2003). Let `si be the
amount of labor employed by a representative industry-s rm in country i. For the numeraire
production to take place everywhere, the total mass of workers in each country should be greater
than the total labor requirement in all industries except S + 1, i.e.,
Li >
X
s
nsi `
s
i 8i:
Therefore, since Li = iL and
X
s
nsi `
s
i =
X
s
si N
s
0
@F + cX
j
xsij
1
A
=
X
s
si
sL
F ss

F s + cs
F s(s   1)
cs

= L
X
s
si 
s
in equilibrium, the condition for factor price equalization reduces to:
i >
X
s
si 
s 8i: (26)
Thus, the expenditure shares s must be small enough for the numeraire good to be produced
everywhere. Alternatively, since S+1 +
P
s 
s = 1, this implies that the expenditure share on
the numeraire good is large enough.
Appendix 2: Existence of a unique equilibrium
19
Since all RMPi's are continuous functions of  (and, therefore, of n), Proposition 1 in Gins-
burgh et al. (1985) shows that an equilibrium always exists. Rewrite the prot function in
country i as follows:
i (n) =
X
j
 
pijdij   cxij

  F
=


X
l
ilLlP
k klnk
  F
= F (RMPi   1) :
Assume that rms relocate in response to prot dierentials, so that ni increases (resp. de-
creases) if i (n) > 0 (resp. < 0). Hence, the dynamics of the relocation process is given
by

ni= ii (n) ; (27)
where

ni dni=dt and where i > 0 stands for the speed of the adjustment in country i.
We rst show that the Jacobian of , denoted by J , is negative denite. Note that
@i (n)
@nj
=  


X
l
jlilLl
(
P
k klnk)
2 ;
so that, by symmetry of the ij 's, the matrix J is symmetric. Then, for any nonzero vector x,
we have
xTJx =  


X
i
X
j
ixijxj
X
l
jlilLl
(
P
k klnk)
2
=  


X
l
P
i iilxi
P
j jjlxjLl
(
P
k klnk)
2
=  


X
l
(
P
i iilxi)
2
(
P
k klnk)
2 Ll < 0;
thus implying that J is negative denite. According to Rosen (1965, Theorem 8), if J is negative
denite for every  2 , the system (27) is globally stable on . Because existence and global
stability of an equilibrium implies uniqueness, our result follows.
Appendix 3: Third country eects
The DHME requires that the industry share i of country i is suciently elastic with respect
to the expenditure share i, which clearly captures the idea that changes in expenditure map into
disproportionate changes in industry. Dierentiating the equilibrium industry share of country
i allows us to rewrite expression (16) as follows:
X
j
@i
@j
dj
di
i
i
> 1: (28)
We can now show that (28) need not hold in a multi-country world.
Proposition 2 (Third country eects) Unless trade costs are the same between any pair of
countries, for every distribution  there exists a perturbation d, with di > 0 and
P
j dj = 0,
such that the disproportionate causation from demand to supply does not hold.
20
Proof. Because i > 0, i > 0, and di > 0, a necessary condition for (16) to hold requires
di to be strictly positive. However, by linearity,
di = 

i ( + d)  

i () =
X
j
gijdj =
X
j 6=i
(gij   gii)dj (29)
where the gij 's are coecients as given in (14), and where the last equality stems from the
constraint that the perturbations sum-up to zero. Except in the case where trade costs are are
the same between any pair of countries, we can always nd perturbations dj such that (29) is
negative, in which case the DHME does not hold for all perturbations satisfying di > 0 andP
j dj = 0. It is sucient to note that in the general asymmetric case minjfgijg < maxjfgijg
and that at least one dj, j 6= i, must be strictly negative.
Appendix 4: Data description and construction
Our data comes from two sources. First, we use the dataset developed at CEPII to obtain
bilateral trade ows as well as intra-country absorption at the 3-digit level for the years 1990
and 2000.16 Second, we use the World Bank Trade and Production Database as well as the
CEPII dataset to obtain industry specic value-added at the 3-digit ISIC level.
We retain only countries which have positive trade ows in at least half of the industries. This
leaves us with 40 countries in 1990, which we split into two equally sized samples. The countries
in the treatment group are as follows: Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Spain, Finland,
France, Great Britain, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nor-
way, Portugal, Sweden, Turkey, and the United States. The countries in the control group are
as follows: Argentina, Bangladesh, Chile, China, Columbia, Egypt, Hong Kong, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Thailand, Taiwan,
and Venezuela.
From the 2000 dataset, we extract the following treatment group: Australia, Austria, Bel-
gium/Luxembourg, Canada, Czech Republic, Germany, Spain, France, Great Britain, Greece,
Italy, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, Turkey, and the
United States. Unfortunately, due to data availability we cannot extract a suciently large
control sample. Thus, we restrict ourselves to the treatment group for this year.
Turning to industries, we focus on 25 3-digit ISIC manufacturing industries in 1990 (see
Tables 1 to 3 for the industry list), whereas the number of industries is 27 for the 2000 sample.
This level of aggregation makes our results comparable with previous works on the HME such as
Trionfetti (2001), Head and Ries, (2001), and Brulhart and Trionfetti (2005); it also minimizes
the potential impacts of intersectoral cross-price elasticities that may distort the analysis, as
argued in Section 2.1.17
The construction of the variables requires only few data: value-added or some other measure
to construct the rm distribution s; production, absorption and import/export data for all
countries and industries to construct the expenditure distribution  and the trade cost matrix
s. We use value-added (henceforth, VA) as an indicator of the distribution of production and
industry across countries. As is well known, using employment data would lead to substantial
bias since dierences in countries' labor productivities and capital-labor ratios cannot be easily
controlled for. We proxy country i's share of industry s as follows:
si =
VAsiP
j VA
s
j
:
16See Mayer and Zignago (2004) for more details on the CEPII dataset. It can be obtained at:
http://team.univ-paris1.fr/teamperso/mayer/data/data.htm
17See Davis and Weinstein (2003) for a discussion of possible aggregation biases.
21
Let Y i, M
s
i and X
s
i stand for country i's total value of production, as well as imports and
exports in industry s from and to the rest of the world, respectively. The expenditure share can
then be expressed as follows:
i =
Yi +
P
s(M
s
i  X
s
i )P
j(Yj +
P
s(M
s
j  X
s
j))
;
which is domestic absorption in country i relative to world absorption (GDP corrected for the
trade balance). Note that since intermediate goods are included, both rms and consumers are
buyers. Let
Xsij  n
s
ip
s
ijx
s
ij
stand for the trade cost inclusive value of industry-s goods produced in country i and shipped
to country j. The values Xsii for intra-country trade ows (i.e., own-absorption) are directly
taken from the CEPII database.18
We further need an estimate of the trade cost matrix s. This can be obtained as in Head and
Mayer (2004, p. 2618). Specically, given (2) as well as (5) and assuming that the theoretical
model is true, we have
XsijX
s
ji
XsiiX
s
jj
=
sij
s
ji
sii
s
jj
:
Assuming, moreover, that bilateral trade barriers are symmetric and internal trade costs ^s are
the same across countries, the estimate of sij=^
s is given by:19
sij
^s
=
s
XsijX
s
ji
XsiiX
s
jj
:
Table 7 summarizes the values of sij=^
s for the country pairs US-Canada and France-Germany.
As can be seen from the table, our estimates are roughly in line with those obtained by Head
and Mayer (2004).
Finally, the implementation of (22) requires one last piece of information in that to calculate
 we need to know s. This is the `average freeness of trade' in industry s. In what follows, we
approximate s as:
s 
1
M(M   1)
MX
i=1
X
j 6=i
sij: (30)
Note that (30) is not entirely satisfactory since, from a theoretical point of view, s should be
the geometric mean of the sij 's. Unfortunately, it is impossible to compute 
s meaningfully
this way because of a signicant proportion of zero ows between countries in the sample. This
stresses the relevance of the `Haveman and Hummels criticism', which points out that although
the CES model implies trade among all countries for each sector, the reality is largely dominated
by zero ows (see Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004, p.732).
18An alternative is to construct them from the World Bank database as the total value of production of country
i, minus its exports to the world: Xsii = Y
s
i  X
s
i for i = 1; 2; : : :M . Our results do not signicantly change when
using this alternative approach. In both cases the measure of Xsii does not correct for re-exports. Although the
problem of re-exports is well-known in the literature (see, e.g., Feenstra and Hanson, 2004), only few countries
actually have good aggregate indicators of re-export shares. Yet, even these countries generally do not provide
detailed information at the industry level. To complicate things, re-exports need to be corrected for re-export
mark-ups, which are even more dicult to obtain. Given the lack of quality data, we choose to disregard the
re-export problem in our analysis. Accordingly, in some rare cases total exports may actually exceed domestic
production for some countries and industries. This feature of small open economies in the data is well-known.
Following Head and Ries (2001), we exclude countries with negative values of domestic absorption from our
industry-level analysis.
19It is readily veried that ^s can take any value and that this does not change the equilibrium conditions (8).
22
Appendix 5: Distributions of test statistics
Table 1 lists the percentage:
Sk1 =
1
M
X
i
sgn
2
4max
8<
:0;
X
j
Zkij
9=
;
3
5 ;
which is binomially distributed. Hence, the null hypothesis is given by H0 : S
k
1= 1=2, whereas
the alternative hypothesis is given by H1 : S
k
1> 1=2. The 0:01 and 0:05 critical values for this
unilateral test can be computed for eachM . For example, forM = 20, S k is signicantly greater
than 1=2 at the 1 percent (resp. 5 percent) level when Zki > 0 in 16 (resp. 15) or more out of
20 countries. These critical values depend on M .
Table 2 lists the percentage:
Sk =
2
M(M   1)
X
i
X
j<i
sgn
h
max
n
0; Zkij
oi
;
which is also binomially distributed so that the same null hypothesis applies. However, the
number of pairs M(M   1)=2 is large enough that we may use the normal approximation to the
binomial distribution, as in Choi and Krishna (2004, p. 903). That is, S k is signicantly greater
than 1=2 at the 1 percent (resp. 5 percent) level when
z 
M(M 1)
2 S
k + 12  
M(M 1)
4q
M(M 1)
16
exceeds 2:33 (resp. 1:645).
Table 3 nally gives the Spearman rank-correlation coecients. The signicance levels can
be found in Kendall and Gibbons (1990).
23
Table 1 | `Country-average Z-tests' (Zsi ) and accessibility-adjusted `country-average Z-tests' (1990 sample)
ISIC Industry classication Treatment group Control group
M % with  % with size M % with  % with size
311 Food products 20 20.0 40.0 20 0.0 0.0
313 Beverages 19 10.5 21.1 20 25.0 25.0
314 Tobacco 19 47.4 36.8 20 45.0 45.0
321 Textiles 20 40.0 65.0 20 25.0 45.0
322 Wearing apparel except footwear 19 47.4 94.7 18 72.2 72.2
323 Leather products 19 57.9 68.4 18 55.6 66.7
324 Footwear except rubber or plastic 19 31.6 63.2 19 21.1 26.3
331 Wood products except furniture 19 21.1 26.3 20 30.0 30.0
332 Furniture except metal 19 52.6 89.5 18 55.6 55.6
341 Paper and products 19 57.9 84.2 20 20.0 40.0
342 Printing and publishing 20 70.0 85.0 20 40.0 45.0
351 Industrial chemicals 19 84.2 94.7 20 50.0 95.0
352 Other chemicals 20 90.0 95.0 20 0.0 10.0
355 Rubber products 20 95.0 95.0 19 78.9 89.5
356 Plastic products 20 100.0 95.0 20 65.0 85.0
362 Glass and products 18 83.3 88.9 20 30.0 40.0
369 Other non-metallic mineral products 19 15.8 26.3 19 52.6 52.6
371 Iron and steel 18 77.8 94.4 20 80.0 80.0
372 Non-ferrous metals 16 31.3 81.3 18 11.1 16.7
381 Fabricated metal products 20 90.0 80.0 20 50.0 70.0
382 Machinery except electrical 20 85.0 80.0 19 89.5 89.5
383 Machinery electric 20 95.0 90.0 20 100.0 100.0
384 Transport equipment 20 95.0 90.0 20 85.0 90.0
385 Professional and scientic equipment 18 94.4 100.0 17 76.5 82.4
390 Other manufactured products 18 94.4 88.9 19 100.0 94.7
Arithmetic mean 63.5 74.9 50.3 57.8
Trade weighted mean 76.2 81.7 61.0 70.0
Notes:  = signicant at 5% level;  = signicant at 1% level
24
Table 2 | `Pairwise Z-tests' (Zsij)and accessibility-adjusted `pairwise Z-tests' (1990 sample)
ISIC Industry classication Treatment group Control group
M % with  % with size M % with  % with size
311 Food products 20 43.2 50.0 20 25.3 26.3
313 Beverages 19 34.5 39.2 20 44.7 45.3
314 Tobacco 19 40.4 40.9 20 45.8 46.3
321 Textiles 20 51.6 50.0 20 43.2 48.9
322 Wearing apparel except footwear 19 50.3 67.8 18 51.0 51.0
323 Leather products 19 59.1 60.2 18 42.5 49.0
324 Footwear except rubber or plastic 19 51.5 50.9 19 38.6 41.5
331 Wood products except furniture 19 49.1 53.2 20 47.9 54.7
332 Furniture except metal 19 60.2 74.9 18 54.2 57.5
341 Paper and products 19 53.8 75.4 20 41.6 45.3
342 Printing and publishing 20 55.3 60.5 20 36.8 38.4
351 Industrial chemicals 19 57.3 80.1 20 49.5 68.9
352 Other chemicals 20 62.1 77.4 20 25.8 30.5
355 Rubber products 20 72.1 77.9 19 53.8 56.7
356 Plastic products 20 70.5 75.8 20 56.8 61.1
362 Glass and products 18 61.4 68.6 20 47.9 54.2
369 Other non-metallic mineral products 19 32.7 44.4 19 46.2 47.4
371 Iron and steel 18 68.6 83.7 20 60.0 62.6
372 Non-ferrous metals 16 47.5 69.2 18 43.1 43.8
381 Fabricated metal products 20 66.3 67.9 20 54.2 57.4
382 Machinery except electrical 20 64.7 63.7 19 71.9 79.5
383 Machinery electric 20 72.6 71.1 20 68.4 78.4
384 Transport equipment 20 80.5 78.4 20 66.3 75.3
385 Professional and scientic equipment 18 68.6 73.9 17 66.9 72.1
390 Other manufactured products 18 72.5 75.8 19 67.3 77.2
Arithmetic mean 57.9 65.2 50.0 54.8
Trade weighted mean 64.4 69.3 55.0 62.0
Notes:  = signicant at 5% level;  = signicant at 1% level
25
Table 3 | Spearman rank correlations and `adjusted' Spearman rank correlations (1990 sample)
ISIC Industry classication Treatment group Control group
M R with  R with size M R with  R with size
311 Food products 20 -0.203 -0.020 20 -0.701 -0.680
313 Beverages 19 -0.433 -0.260 20 -0.107 -0.102
314 Tobacco 19 -0.316 -0.296 20 -0.114 -0.089
321 Textiles 20 -0.036 -0.017 20 -0.214 -0.060
322 Wearing apparel except footwear 19 0.030 0.460 18 0.088 0.088
323 Leather products 19 0.275 0.279 18 -0.183 -0.007
324 Footwear except rubber or plastic 19 0.028 0.005 19 -0.302 -0.181
331 Wood products except furniture 19 -0.091 0.079 20 -0.098 0.141
332 Furniture except metal 19 0.304 0.688 18 0.129 0.216
341 Paper and products 19 0.089 0.677 20 -0.275 -0.143
342 Printing and publishing 20 0.182 0.314 20 -0.349 -0.293
351 Industrial chemicals 19 0.212 0.649 20 0.014 0.535
352 Other chemicals 20 0.274 0.577 20 -0.654 -0.547
355 Rubber products 20 0.639 0.746 19 0.116 0.182
356 Plastic products 20 0.505 0.614 20 0.192 0.325
362 Glass and products 18 0.292 0.534 20 -0.095 0.108
369 Other non-metallic mineral products 19 -0.496 -0.226 19 -0.100 -0.068
371 Iron and steel 18 0.571 0.831 20 0.320 0.400
372 Non-ferrous metals 16 -0.071 0.468 18 -0.216 -0.185
381 Fabricated metal products 20 0.462 0.445 20 0.183 0.250
382 Machinery except electrical 20 0.377 0.323 19 0.605 0.742
383 Machinery electric 20 0.564 0.522 20 0.507 0.738
384 Transport equipment 20 0.820 0.741 20 0.411 0.630
385 Professional and scientic equipment 18 0.424 0.657 17 0.485 0.569
390 Other manufactured products 18 0.505 0.622 19 0.474 0.693
Notes:  = signicant at 5% level;  = signicant at 1% level
26
Table 4 | Sign tests, rank tests, and correlation coecients for the treatment group (2000 sample)
ISIC Industry classication Zsi sign tests Z
s
ij sign tests Rank correlations
M % with  % with size % with  % with size % with  % with size
311 Food products 20 85.0 95.0 61.1 74.7 0.292 0.656
313 Beverages 19 31.6 42.1 51.5 56.7 0.035 0.196
314 Tobacco 19 89.5 89.5 59.6 63.7 0.237 0.381
321 Textiles 17 58.8 94.1 54.1 80.1 0.091 0.787
322 Wearing apparel except footwear 15 26.7 73.3 46.7 54.3 -0.046 0.129
323 Leather products 16 37.5 25.0 43.3 51.7 -0.224 0.056
324 Footwear except rubber or plastic 16 12.5 50.0 39.2 58.3 -0.371 0.285
331 Wood products except furniture 18 44.4 44.4 47.1 58.8 -0.096 0.251
332 Furniture except metal 18 66.7 72.2 52.9 62.1 0.106 0.401
341 Paper and products 18 83.3 88.9 63.4 70.6 0.342 0.523
342 Printing and publishing 19 89.5 100.0 62.6 73.1 0.347 0.625
351 Industrial chemicals 16 93.8 87.5 66.7 71.7 0.468 0.653
352 Other chemicals 15 100 86.7 75.2 74.3 0.711 0.600
353 Petroleum reneries 16 62.5 75.0 61.7 71.7 0.421 0.629
355 Rubber products 17 58.8 64.7 61.8 59.6 0.275 0.301
356 Plastic products 19 89.5 94.7 66.7 73.1 0.437 0.656
361 Pottery china earthenware 17 5.9 11.8 39.7 40.4 -0.279 -0.206
362 Glass and products 19 42.1 63.2 52.6 60.8 0.053 0.284
369 Other non-metallic mineral products 19 47.4 63.2 50.9 59.1 0.009 0.205
371 Iron and steel 18 38.9 72.2 52.3 60.1 0.040 0.325
372 Non-ferrous metals 16 56.3 93.8 54.2 73.3 0.094 0.624
381 Fabricated metal products 16 88.2 88.2 64.7 66.2 0.382 0.449
382 Machinery except electrical 14 92.9 85.7 78.0 70.3 0.705 0.516
383 Machinery electric 17 88.2 82.4 66.2 76.5 0.368 0.630
384 Transport equipment 18 88.9 50.0 73.2 64.1 0.643 0.408
385 Professional and scientic equipment 13 92.3 84.6 71.8 73.1 0.538 0.522
390 Other manufactured products 14 85.7 100.0 59.3 82.4 0.204 0.842
Arithmetic mean 65.1 73.3 58.4 66.0
Trade weighted mean 82.5 76.0 66.9 69.7
Notes:  = signicant at 5% level;  = signicant at 1% level
27
Table 5 | Industry level break down of R&D, types of goods and other indicators
ISIC Industry classication Pagano and Schivardi (1) Rauch (2) Lyons and Sembenelli (3)
R&D personnel
employment
R&D expenditure
value added
conservative liberal type of good intensive
311 Food products 0.59 1.17 w w hom. adv.
313 Beverages 0.59 1.17 n n het. adv.
314 Tobacco { { r r het. adv.
321 Textiles 0.29 0.60 w w hom. {
322 Wearing apparel except footwear 0.11 0.60 n n hom. {
323 Leather products 0.29 0.60 n n hom. {
324 Footwear except rubber or plastic { { n n hom. {
331 Wood products except furniture 0.09 2.66 n/r n/w hom. {
332 Furniture except metal 0.09 2.66 n n hom. {
341 Paper and products 1.69 1.11 { { hom. {
342 Printing and publishing 0.24 1.11 { { hom. {
351 Industrial chemicals 9.67 9.70 n n het. R&D.
352 Other chemicals 9.67 9.70 r r het. R&D., adv.
355 Rubber products 0.91 3.17 n n het. R&D.
356 Plastic products { { r r hom. {
362 Glass and products 0.08 2.04 n n hom. {
369 Other non-metallic mineral products 0.08 2.04 w/r w/r hom. {
371 Iron and steel 1.11 1.51 n/r n/r hom. {
372 Non-ferrous metals 1.11 1.51 w w hom. {
381 Fabricated metal products 0.71 1.41 n n hom. {
382 Machinery except electrical 3.33 12.27 n n het. R&D.
383 Machinery electric 3.21 7.10 n n het. R&D.
384 Transport equipment 7.03 22.76 n n het. R&D.
385 Professional and scientic equipment 11.68 17.99 n n het. R&D., adv.
390 Other manufactured products { { { { { {
Notes: (1) { Industries 384 and 385 are averages of a ner subdivision.
(2) { w=homogenous, r=reference priced, n=dierentiated
(3) { hom.=homogenous, het.=heterogenous, adv.=advertising
28
Table 6 | Industry level predictions and realizations of the HME
ISIC Industry classication Expected Observed Overall HME Brulhart and Davis and
1990y 2000y Controly (adjusted) Trionfetti (2005) Weinstein (2003)
311 Food products low no yes no   strong support
313 Beverages uncertain no no/yes no   weak support
314 Tobacco uncertain no yes no  
321 Textiles low no no/yes no   strong support strong support
322 Wearing apparel except footwear low no/yes no no  
323 Leather products low no/yes no no   strong support
324 Footwear except rubber or plastic low no no no  
331 Wood products except furniture uncertain no no/yes no   strong support
332 Furniture except metal uncertain yes no/yes no/yes HME
341 Paper and products low no/yes yes no +
342 Printing and publishing low no/yes yes no +
351 Industrial chemicals high no/yes yes yes HME weak support weak support
352 Other chemicals high yes yes no + weak support
353 Petroleum reneries high | yes | +
355 Rubber products high yes yes no/yes HME weak support
356 Plastic products uncertain yes yes yes HME weak support
361 Pottery china earthenware low | no |  
362 Glass and products uncertain yes no/yes no +
369 Other non-metallic mineral products low no no/yes no  
371 Iron and steel uncertain yes no/yes yes HME
372 Non-ferrous metals low no/yes no/yes no + strong support
381 Fabricated metal products uncertain yes yes no + strong support weak support
382 Machinery except electrical high yes yes yes HME strong support
383 Machinery electric high yes yes yes HME strong support
384 Transport equipment high yes yes yes HME strong support
385 Professional and scientic equipment high yes yes yes HME strong support
390 Other manufactured products uncertain yes yes yes HME strong support
Notes: y { First value refers to unadjusted, second to adjusted.
A single value indicates that both are the same.
In column 7, a + indicats more support, a   indicates less support.
29
Table 7 | Freeness of trade values ij for selected country pairs
ISIC USA{CAN FRA{GER
1990 2000 1990 2000
311 Food products 0.019 0.035 0.023 0.023
313 Beverages 0.018 0.033 0.031 0.044
314 Tobacco 0.003 0.003 0.016 0.025
321 Textiles 0.028 0.141 0.077 |
322 Wearing apparel except footwear 0.011 0.056 0.037 0.041
323 Leather products 0.076 0.203 0.083 |
324 Footwear except rubber or plastic 0.036 0.078 0.052 0.042
331 Wood products except furniture 0.092 0.145 0.024 |
332 Furniture except metal 0.074 0.093 0.03 0.017
341 Paper and products 0.120 0.258 | 0.017
342 Printing and publishing 0.017 0.05 0.015 0.016
351 Industrial chemicals 0.147 0.344 | 0.222
352 Other chemicals 0.034 0.104 0.06 0.099
353 Petroleum reneries | 0.088 | 0.013
355 Rubber products 0.128 0.199 0.123 0.131
356 Plastic products 0.04 0.105 0.032 0.037
361 Pottery china earthenware | 0.125 | |
362 Glass and products 0.116 0.271 0.089 0.1
369 Other non-metallic mineral products 0.025 0.038 0.025 0.015
371 Iron and steel 0.068 0.110 0.083 0.093
372 Non-ferrous metals 0.238 | 0.09 0.12
381 Fabricated metal products 0.057 0.184 0.039 0.036
382 Machinery except electrical 0.198 0.244 0.097 0.122
383 Machinery electric 0.197 0.490 0.058 0.085
384 Transport equipment 0.3 0.525 0.143 0.168
385 Professional and scientic equipment 0.170 | 0.908 |
390 Other manufactured products 0.051 0.244 0.126 0.346
30

