                                                         
*
 The paper was presented at the Research Seminar of the Department of Economics during a visit at the 
WU as a guest researcher. For valuable comments I thank Hansjörg Klausinger. 
†
 Department of Economics (520), University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany 
harald.hagemann@uni-hohenheim.de 
 
L. Albert Hahn’s  
Economic Theory of Bank Credit* 
 
 
Harald Hagemann† 
 
 
 
Working Paper No. 134, December 2010 
 
 
Abstract ― In the mid-1920s L. Albert Hahn’s Economic Theory of Bank Credit (1920) 
had become one of the most influential and certainly the most controversial book on 
monetary theory in the German language area. Hahn wanted to overcome the orthodox 
view that every credit has to be financed by means of savings deposited by the banks. 
Banks are producers of credit which is not limited by the amount of saving. Capital was 
seen by Hahn as the result of credit creation and not of saving. Over time Hahn 
moderated some exaggerations of the first two editions of The Economic Theory of 
Bank Credit, such as the idea of a permanent boom. The paper also compares Hahn’s 
views on the role and effects of credit with those of Schumpeter and investigates 
Hahn’s claim to have anticipated essential ideas of Keynes’ General Theory. 
 
 
Keywords: Bank credit, business-cycle theory 
 
JEL-Classification: B22; B31; E32 
 
  
 1 
I.   Introduction 
 
In the mid-1920s L. Albert Hahn‟s Economic Theory of Bank Credit (1920) had become one of the 
most influential and certainly the most controversial book on monetary theory in the German 
language area. Whereas the author still had stated in the introduction to the unchanged second 
edition (1924) that his contribution had been widely neglected by the economics profession, 
Gottfried Haberler only three years later not only came to the conclusion that “Albert Hahn 
undoubtedly deserves a prominent place in the history of the most recent German monetary theory” 
but also “that of late a Hahn literature has developed, inasmuch as scarcely a book is published 
today on money and credit that does not discuss Hahn‟s teachings at length.”1 Haberler‟s long, 
critical but also respectful review article of Hahn‟s Bank Credit itself has to be regarded as one of 
the most insightful contributions to the contemporary Hahn literature. 
 
The most interesting aspects of Hahn‟s Economic Theory of Bank Credit are contained in the 
second part of the book where the author is concerned with the effects of credit creation and credit 
extension on production. From the beginning Hahn was convinced “that bank credit has the 
importance of a stimulus of the conjuncture” (1920: 156).2 Thus a decisive function of an economic 
analysis of bank credit consists in a contribution to a monetary theory of the business cycle. 
Consequentially, Holtfrerich (1989) in his investigation of the development of monetary business-
cycle theory in the German language area focuses on the main contributions made by Wicksell, 
Schumpeter, Hahn, Mises and Hayek. Knut Wicksell had not only been among those economists 
who early on perceived the growing importance of the banking system for the money supply of the 
economy at the end of the nineteenth century, and the elasticity or endogeneity associated with 
credit creation, i.e. the banks‟ ability to create deposits in their act of lending, but also placed it into 
the center of his analysis in Interest and Prices. There he confronted the case of a pure credit 
economy, in which every payment, and consequently every loan, is made by means of cheques or 
giro facilities, with the opposite extreme of a pure cash economy, a system of pure outside money to 
which the classical quantity theory applies. In contrast, in an advanced economy with highly 
developed credit institutions, which can grant loans in excess of the amount of savings deposited, 
the money supply is completely elastic being “more and more inclined to accommodate itself to the 
level of demand”3. In such an organised credit economy stability of the price level requires equality 
                                                        
1
 Haberler ([1927, 803] 1949, 253), the 1949 translation is a substantially reduced version of his 1927 German review 
article. The proud author of Economic Theory of Bank Credit himself refers extensively to this „Hahn literature‟ at the 
beginning of the 3
rd
 edition. See Hahn (1930: XIV-XVI). 
2
 If not otherwise specified, translations from German sources are my own. 
3
 Wicksell [1898] (1936:110). 
 
  
 2 
between the natural (equilibrium) rate and the money rate of interest, i.e. the rate of interest charged 
on loans. Discrepancies between the two rates lead to cumulative processes. 
 
The idea of creative destruction by innovations and the notion that bank credit is a decisive 
prerequisite for pioneering entrepreneurs to finance innovational investment activities are key 
pillars of Schumpeter‟s Theory of Economic Development. The financing of production is 
essentially performed by the creation and destruction of credit. Schumpeter shares Wicksell‟s view 
that the disturbance of economic equilibrium primarily emerges from an enlargement of profitable 
investment options due to technical progress rather than by an artificial lowering of the money rate 
of interest by the banks which thereby causes a period of expansion which is unsustainable. The 
latter is emphasized in the works of his two Austrian compatriots Mises‟s Theory of Money and 
Credit and Hayek‟s Prices and Production. There, the bust is the inevitable consequence of the 
credit-induced boom in which the reallocation of productive resources to excessively roundabout 
methods of production is corrected. Mises‟s argument of excessive credits by the banking sector as 
the decisive cause of cyclical fluctuations is most clearly stated in his Monetary Stabilization and 
Cyclical Policy (1928), in which he not only distances himself from views still held by Schumpeter 
but even from some of his own earlier views. 
 
With his Economic Theory of Bank Credit, which remained the most important monograph among 
his many writings, Hahn wanted to overcome the orthodox view that every credit has to be financed 
by means of savings deposited by the banks. Whereas he regarded the classical doctrine as adequate 
for the state of development of the economy at the time of the classical economists (of whom he 
gave highest praise to Ricardo), he found it most inappropriate for a modern economy with an 
elastic money and credit supply. The central regression line of Hahn‟s thought is the doctrine that 
“capital formation is not the result of saving but of the granting of credit”4. Despite many later 
modifications and some fundamental changes of his economic views, which for some modern 
historians of economic thought mutated a “precursor of Keynesianism” into one of “the monetarist 
counterrevolution”5, Hahn stuck to this view until the end of his life. Thus he concludes the 
condensed – autobiographical – history of economic thought survey of his own development as a 
theorist over half-a-century with pointing to the “(although only to be applied with care) 
fundamental principle of his business cycle- and employment theory: „Every expansion of credit 
results in an expansion of goods because of a change in its distribution. Credit takes the goods out 
of nothing where they would have remained without credit expansion’.”6 
 
                                                        
4
 With this priority of credit creation over capital formation Hahn (1920: 120) starts the explanation of his own theory in 
contrast to the traditional doctrine. 
5
 See, e.g., Boudreaux and Selgin (1990). 
6
 Hahn (1963:13 and 1930: 125-6). 
 
  
 3 
Since Hahn also shares with Schumpeter the view that the main function of credit is the financing of 
economic development, it is understandable that Howard Ellis (1934) in his opus magnum, i.e. his 
classical survey of German Monetary Theory: 1905-1933 contrasts “The Schumpeter-Hahn type of 
cycle theory” with “The Mises-Hayek Analysis of Cycles”. Ellis also ventures that for Hahn as for 
Schumpeter “the failure to perceive the dangers of over-investment accounts for the sanguine 
attitude of both writers toward the outcome of credit inflation”7, which is in remarkable contrast to 
the monetary overinvestment theories of the cycle as developed by Mises and Hayek. 
 
During more than half-a-century Hahn led a threefold existence: as a practical banker, a highly 
gifted economic journalist, and as an economic theorist with a high output of publications in the 
area of money, credit, business cycles and currency problems. However, even as a theorist he 
behaved as an entrepreneur, who consistently also worked on the self-construction of his own 
biography. Thus Jan-Otmar Hesse in his contribution to the HOPE 2006 Conference “Economists‟ 
Lives: Biography and Autobiography in the History of Economics” has pointed out correctly that 
“the self-construction of Hahn‟s life played a large part in his academic contributions”8. One cannot 
therefore understand the particular form of L. Albert Hahn‟s economics without knowing his 
biography. His academic life and his scholarly contributions are intertwined with his entrepreneurial 
life and his business success.  
 
Section II therefore deals with the main stations of Hahn‟s entrepreneurial and academic life and 
gives an overview on his scholarly publications. Section III focuses on the more radical first edition 
of his opus magnum, Economic Theory of Bank Credit (1920), which created a general outcry and 
gave rise to the “Hahn literature” after it was published in an unchanged second edition in 1924 just 
after the end of the German hyperinflation. In Section IV we concentrate on some major 
modifications in the third edition, which was published against a completely different background 
of the state of the economy, i.e. at the beginning of the deflationary Great Depression. Hahn‟s 
abating of his earlier radicalism is already foreshadowed in his well-known 1923 contribution on 
Credit to the fourth edition of the Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften. In Section V we will 
compare Hahn‟s views on the role and effects of credit with those of Schumpeter, and more closely 
examine similarities but also some important differences. When Keynes‟s General Theory was 
published in 1936, the former propagator of credit inflation, who had been classified by critics as 
the leading “inflation theorist by elimination of interest”9, himself had developed already into a 
fierce opponent of Keynes, and in particular the inflationary dangers of his employment theory. 
Hahn‟s collected essays on The Economics of Illusion (1949a) is a pamphlet against Keynes and 
Keynesianism. In his introduction he could not help “thinking that what is today praised as the 
                                                        
7
 Ellis (1934: 334). 
8
 Hesse (2007: 226). 
9
 Lampe (1926:131). 
 
  
 4 
“Keynesian Revolution” should, more accurately, be called the “Keynesian General Confusion”10. 
Nevertheless Hahn claimed to have anticipated the essential elements of Keynesian economics. 
Thus we find Hahn in the paradoxical position of, on the one hand, rejecting Keynesianism as “a sin 
of my youth” and, on the other hand, claiming priority over Keynes, “for as early as 1920 in my 
Volkwirtschaftliche Theorie des Bankkredits I presented what to me are the basic Keynesian 
statements”11. In Section VI we will investigate how much Hahn‟s own claim of anticipation of 
essential Keynesian ideas, which too easily has been accepted by many economists, is justified. The 
concluding Section VII will aim for a final appraisal and balanced assessment of Hahn‟s Economic 
Theory of Bank Credit. 
 
II.   L. Albert Hahn: A theorising banker fifty years between inflation and deflation 
 
L(ucien) Albert Hahn was born into a family of private bankers in Frankfurt am Main on 12 
October 1889.
12
 The Bankhaus L. Albert Hahn, which had been founded by his grandfather in 1821, 
became a stock exchange company, the Deutsche Effecten- und Wechselbank, in 1872 in which, 
however, his father and uncle retained a majority. After finishing high school at the Goethe-
Gymnasium in Frankfurt, Hahn started to study medicine at the University of Freiburg before he 
moved to law which he studied at the Universities of Heidelberg and Marburg, where he finished 
with a PhD in 1912. Thereafter he first worked in the bank of the family before he started his 
traineeship at the Country Court in Frankfurt to complete his legal education which, however, due 
to the outbreak of the First World War he could only finalize in 1919 at the Kammergericht (court 
of justice) in Berlin. In the very same year he entered the managing board of the family‟s bank to 
succeed his sick father. Hahn, who in the last two years of the war had already published articles on 
„The gold policy of the Bank of Sweden during the war‟ (1917) and on the transition „From the War 
to Peace Currency‟ (1918), was aiming for a better theoretical understanding of his practical 
activities as a leading private banker. Always regarding himself as “ein theoretisierender 
Praktiker”13 (a theorising practitioner), Hahn acquired a second PhD at the University of Marburg 
in 1919, now in economics in the philosophical faculty, with the article “The object of the money 
and capital market in the modern economy. A contribution to the theory of the banking business” 
(1919), “whose results were extremely unorthodox”14. The article became the basis of the widely 
expanded Economic Theory of Bank Credit published in the following year, in which Hahn 
developed his thesis of an autonomous credit generating power of the banking system and its 
consequences for capital formation, the business cycle and employment. The book, “full of youthful 
                                                        
10
 Hahn (1949: 6). 
11
 Ibid. 
12
 For details on Hahn‟s biography see Kulla (1999), Hesse (2007), and Hauck (2009). 
13
 Hahn (1963:1). 
14
 Ibid: 4. 
 
  
 5 
enthusiasm and convinced of having discovered the path to permanent prosperity”15, was heavily 
criticized by many contemporary economists as an “apotheosis of credit creation”16 after the 
hyperinflationary processes in Germany and Austria. 
 
Due to internal pressure the full-time banker became an avocational theoretician
17
 who published 
regularly in scholarly journals as well as in the best newspapers and economic magazines, thereby 
exerting some influence on the banking community and the public policy debate.
18
 In June 1926 the 
Frankfurter Gesellschaft für Konjunkturforschung (Frankfurt Society for Research on Business 
Cycles) was founded at the initiative of Hahn. The trademark of the Society, which was chaired by 
Hahn‟s friend Eugen Altschul19 and financially supported by the Frankfurt Chamber of Commerce, 
was the focus on the methodological foundations of business-cycle research, starting with a critical 
evaluation of the Harvard methods by Oskar Anderson (1929).
20
 The Society cooperated strongly 
with the faculty members of the Goethe University from which Hahn received an honorary 
professorship in 1928. From the summer semester 1929 to the winter semester 1932/33 Hahn gave 
regularly courses on money and credit in the faculty of economics and the social sciences. 
 
In the early 1920s Hahn‟s insights into the essence of the hyperinflationary processes and its 
consequences had helped to maintain the capital of his bank. Less than a decade later he was siding 
with the advocates of orthodox economic policies against the “economic activists” (Garvy 1975) in 
the controversial debates to fight the deflation and mass unemployment at the end of the Weimar 
Republic. In spring 1933 Hahn was among the 19 members of the Faculty of Economics and the 
Social Sciences of the Goethe University who were dismissed for racial and/or political reasons on 
the basis of the Restoration of Civil Service Act promulgated by the Nazis on April 7, 1933 only 
seven weeks after their rise to power. Among others the list included such outstanding scholars as 
Henryk Grossmann, Carl Grünberg, Adolf Löwe, Karl Mannheim, Fritz Neumark, Franz 
Oppenheimer and Karl Pribram.
21
 
 
The Hahn family was able to sell their assets of the bank to a consortium of Berlin banks just in 
time before the „legal‟ expropriation of Jews led to a rapid decline of prices. In the same year 1936 
Hahn emigrated to Switzerland where he settled in Geneva. Since the Prussian annexation of 
Frankfurt in 1866 the Hahn family had acquired Swiss citizenship to avoid that their sons had to 
                                                        
15
 Hahn (1949: 171). 
16
 Ellis (1934: 329). 
17
 See Hahn (1963: 3). 
18
 His most important articles were also published as two books of collected essays under the title Money and Credit 
(Hahn 1924, 1929). For a complete bibliography see Hahn (1963: 241-7). 
19
 After emigrating from Nazi Germany, Altschul (1887-1959) worked from 1933-39 at the National Bureau of 
Economic Research with Wesley C. Mitchell whose Business Cycles Altschul had edited in German in 1931. 
20
 For a more detailed analysis of the Frankfurt Society for Research on Business Cycles see Kulla (1996: chpt. E). 
21
 For a full list see Hesse (2004: 443). 
 
  
 6 
exert military service in the Prussian army.
22
 In Switzerland the only son of Hahn and Nora von 
Girsewald (1906-1992), whom he had married in Vaduz, Liechtenstein in 1933 when he converted 
to Protestantism, was born in 1936. From Geneva Hahn moved to New York in 1939, where he 
worked as an asset manager and lectured regularly at the Graduate Faculty of Political and Social 
Science of the New School for Social Research which had been founded as the „University in Exile‟ 
in fall 1933. In his first role he won a fortune by buying shares of American oil companies just 
before the United States entered the war against Nazi Germany. As an instructor and author of 
economic articles he now followed a strongly anti-Keynesian track in the country of the New Deal, 
which culminated in his collected essays The Economics of Illusion, published in New York with an 
introduction of the exposed anti-Keynesian Henry Hazlitt in 1949. In the same year Hahn left the 
United States and returned to Europe where he settled in Zurich, Paris and in Southern France. 
From there he quite often commuted to Frankfurt where he got back his honorary professorship 
from the Goethe University in 1948 and lectured on Keynes‟s General Theory23, but didn‟t continue 
to teach regularly. However, in Germany Hahn became active again as a banker and finally in 1964 
a member of the Supervisory board of the former bank of the family. Economically and politically 
he was now an “extreme liberal”24. No wonder that Ludwig Mises, Henry Hazlitt, Wilhelm Röpke, 
but also Gottfried Haberler, Friedrich Lutz and the German Minister of Economics and later 
Chancellor Ludwig Erhard were among the key contributors to the Festschrift which Hahn received 
at his 70
th
 birthday by his friends (Muthesius 1959). Hahn had become an active member in the 
Mont Pelerin Society. Due to Machlup in 1963 Hahn also became a member of the Bellagio Group 
which was engaged in the fight for flexible exchange rates in the final decade of the Bretton Woods 
System. Hahn died in Zurich on 4 October, 1968. 
 
III. Hahn’s 1920 Economic Theory of Bank Credit: An “apotheosis of credit creation” 
 
At the end of WW I Joseph Schumpeter established himself as a leading monetary theorist in the 
German language area with his long essay on “Money and the Social Product” (Schumpeter 1917-
18), in which he systematically elaborated central ideas on money and credit which were already 
contained in his Theory of Economic Development. There he had emphasized the financing of 
innovative investment activities by means of credit as the key function of the banking system. In 
Schumpeter‟s view the banker is not the trader but the producer of purchasing power. “Credit is 
essentially the creation of purchasing power for the purpose of transferring it to the entrepreneur, 
but not simply the transfer of existing purchasing power” (Schumpeter 1934: 107). In contrast to the 
means of exchange-function of money, credit creation shows clearly the capitalistic function of 
money, i.e. its importance for industrial development. In chapter 8 “Money, Credit and Cycles” of 
                                                        
22
 See Hauck (2009: 19). 
23
 Caspari (2004: 467). 
24
 Neumark (in Schefold 2004, p.92). 
 
  
 7 
Part IV of his History of Economic Analysis Schumpeter (1954) deals intensively with the important 
developments that occurred between 1870 and 1914 in the banking systems of all advanced 
economies. However, Schumpeter for whom money plays the role of a servant for proceedings in 
the real economy and basically constitutes a method to dispose of goods or factors of production, 
saw the true role of banks in capitalist evolution only insufficiently reflected in the literature on 
banking and finance in the pre-WW I period which “was as much of a separate compartment within 
the literature on money and credit as the latter was a separate compartment within the literature on 
general economics” (Schumpeter 1954: 1110-1). 
 
Schumpeter who exposes the great difficulties economists had to grasp that bank loans do create 
deposits and have a central role to play in the financing of investment, independently of previous 
savings, and acknowledges Wicksell‟s achievements “to recognize certain aspects of „credit 
creation‟, in particular the phenomenon of Forced Saving”, in his analysis of the effects upon prices, 
emphasizes that “it was not until 1924 that the theoretical job was done completely in a book by 
Hahn” (Ibid: 1115-6).25 However, with regard to the definitive impact of Hahn‟s book Schumpeter 
in retrospect came to the conclusion: “One reason why this book left so many economists 
unconvinced was ... the fact that the theory of bank credit there presented was wedded to certain 
highly optimistic views about the possibility of achieving permanent prosperity, which prejudiced 
some economists against its essential achievement” (Ibid, n. 10).26 
 
The first and second edition of Hahn‟s Economic Theory of Bank Credit consists of three parts: 
Credit and Banks (pp. 6-105), Credit and Goods world (pp. 106-159), and International Credit (pp. 
160-171). The short third part is eliminated in the third edition. The lengthy first part shows the 
intimate connection between theory and practice which penetrated Hahn‟s work lifelong and did not 
change with his pronounced mutation from a “pre-Keynesian” to an anti-Keynesian. In sometimes 
illuminating, sometimes rather technical and occasionally rather boring explanations the author 
wants to make clear the role of credit in the modern economy to his contemporaries. Hahn is 
respectful of the classical economists whose monetary theory was adequate for their time, but 
ardently declares the “uselessness” of the quantity theory for the modern economy, in which cash 
money plays only “a very unimportant, sometimes a completely vanishing role”27. This reasoning is 
as important for Hahn‟s further argumentation as is his view that the active business of banks 
dominates the passive side.
28
 It is impossible to consider the means which are at the disposal of 
                                                        
25
 It should read 1920 since the second edition of Hahn‟s book is a completely unchanged version of the first edition. 
26
 Strangely, Schumpeter in the note to the text refers to the third and completely revised edition of Hahn‟s book (1930) 
in which the vision of a permanent prosperity does not conclude the author‟s considerations of the effects of credit 
creation any longer. 
27
 See Hahn (1920/24: 16-8). 
28
 Ibid: 32. 
 
  
 8 
banks for the granting of credit as an independently available stock, because these means are 
generated only by credit creation. 
 
According to Hahn the activity of banks consists in functioning as guarantors, i.e. to procure trust 
for debtors. Money and credit markets therefore are nothing else than markets on which credit in the 
literal sense of trust is traded.
29
 Hahn gives his Economic Theory of Bank Credit the leitmotiv from 
the British economist Henry Dunning Macleod (1821-1902) “A Bank is therefore not an office for 
„borrowing‟ and „lending‟ money, but it is a Manufactory of Credit (Macleod II/2, 1891: 594).30 
Following not only Macleod but also Wicksell and Schumpeter
31
, Hahn denies the traditional idea 
of the role of the banks to function only as the mediator of credit between savers and investors. 
Different to Macleod, in whose writings money creation by private banks sides with that of the 
central bank, in Hahn the money creation capacity of the private banking sector takes the key role. 
“It is a basic view of this work that the passive business of banks is not the presupposition but only 
the result of credit creation” (Hahn 1920/24: 55). 
 
Even in the third and completely revised edition of Economic Theory of Bank Credit the author 
emphasizes that “it is a main purpose of this work to underline the relative independence of credit 
expansion from preceding and simultaneous savings and to point to the enormous theoretical and 
practical importance of an amount of credit expansion which transcends the sum of savings made 
simultaneously” (Hahn 1930: 41). 
 
In part II of his book Hahn (1920/24) first discusses the “prevailing view on the relation between 
credit and the amount of capital goods” which he criticizes for the neglect of connecting business 
cycles with capital theory (119). For Hahn an expansion of credit means nothing else than an 
increase of demand for goods leading to an expansion of production since, as Hahn implicitly 
assumes to be the case, unemployed resources are available. Hahn emphasizes, as later Keynes, the 
deflationary consequences of voluntary savings and the positive effects of an expansionary credit 
policy for innovations and employment. Thus Hahn begins his discussion of the influences of credit 
                                                        
29
 See Hahn (1920/24: 51-2) and Haberler (1927: 813) who criticizes Hahn that the banks are not mediating trust but 
purchasing power which allows debtors to acquire goods in the amount of the credited sum. 
30
 See Hahn (1920/24: 52, n. 61). The leitmotiv is kept in the German translation on the cover page in the third edition 
(Hahn 1930). 
31
 Schumpeter (1954: 1115: n. 7) considered Macleod as ”an economist of many merits who somehow failed to achieve 
recognition, or even to be taken quite seriously, owing to his inability to put his many good ideas in a professionally 
acceptable form“. In a typically contradictory Schumpeterian style he goes on to argue that Macleod “laid the 
foundations of the modern theory of the subject … , though what he really succeeded in doing was to discredit this 
theory for quite a time”. 
For a modern assessment of Macleod‟s credit theory of money see Skaggs (1997). 
 
  
 9 
on capital, the core and most revolutionary part of Economic Theory of Bank Credit with the 
dictum: “Capital formation is not the result of saving but of the granting of credit.” 32 
 
With this fundamental proposition of his Economic Theory of Bank Credit Hahn turned upside 
down the traditional view that credit represented a store of savings deposited with the banks by the 
public. According to his revolutionary view the formation of deposits is not the cause but the effect 
of the granting of credit by the banks. Despite all emphasis on the positive consequences of credit 
extension via capital formation in the long run, Hahn primarily understood his approach as a 
monetary theory of the business cycle in which stress is laid on the credit theory of production. All 
relevant statements on the production and distribution of goods “are deduced from the sentence that 
bank credit exerts the importance of a stimulus to conjuncture” (Hahn 1920/24: 156). According to 
Hahn credit constitutes the conditio sine qua non of the production of commodities and all capital 
formation in a modern economy. His most outstanding early critic Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz has 
aptly summarized Hahn‟s main thesis in the statement: “Am Anfang war die Schuld.”33 (In the 
beginning was the Debt.) 
 
According to Hahn the view of the representatives of the quantity theory that the extension of 
money and credit does not increase real income is not only inaccurate but wrong. “Credit takes the 
goods out of nothing, where they would have remained without credit extension” (Hahn 1920/24: 
141). Hahn‟s conclusion that the extension of credit leads to an expansion of production rests on 
two assumptions
34
: 1. Modern mass production with its economies of scale requires only a small 
increase of labour input for a doubling of production output.  
2. There is an enormous reserve of an underemployed labour force. Both components together have 
raised enormously the “elasticity” of production. The extension of credit activates these formerly 
unemployed resources which causes an increase of real wages. The change in distribution causes an 
increase in production. Hahn concludes that distribution, although following production, therefore, 
like consumption, logically precedes production.
35
 The early Hahn, who sides with the critics of 
Say‟s law, also invokes the effective demand analysis of Malthus with the emphasis on income 
distribution as an anticipation of his own ideas.
36
 However, the parallels are not very strong, except 
a certain emphasis on underconsumption and income distribution. 
 
The increase in wages only holds for the upswing of the economy. In the long run, however, a 
modern economy is characterized by the tendency towards an excess supply of labour due to the 
                                                        
32
 Hahn (1920/24: 120). This dictum which is printed in italics in the first and second edition of the book, is not made 
anymore in this explicit form in the third edition. 
33
 v. Bortkiewicz (1921-22: 87). 
34
 See Hahn (1920/24: 135-7). 
35
 See Hahn (1920/24: 138). 
36
 Ibid: 147, n. 13. 
 
  
 10 
two factors of a labour-saving technical progress and population growth which results in a 
downward pressure on real wages. This tendency towards a displacement and lying idleness of 
workers could be counteracted by an extension of credit which exerts the function of an offsetting 
force leading to capital formation and generating new employment opportunities. Credit extension 
thus is an “eminent social factor” (Ibid: 140). 
 
But how long can the boom last? Is there any limit for credit extension to raise production and 
consumption and thereby the wealth of nations? Hahn, who held the view that cyclical fluctuations 
are nothing else than alternating credit inflations and deflations, gave as a first answer to this 
theoretically as well as practically important question that the expansion could persist as long as 
additional credit drew the last remaining reserves of labour power into production.
37
 However, 
experience shows that this does not happen in economic reality, and instead of pushing production 
and consumption to the theoretical limit a general glut occurs before this point is reached. Hahn 
identifies the reason for the deficient matching of production by consumption in an increase of 
savings which make “circulating deposits metamorphose into savings accounts” (Ibid: 147). The 
result is a shortage of effective demand causing a fall in prices, wages, production and employment. 
Hahn not only refers to Malthus and Sismondi but also to Hobson‟s analysis of oversaving. 
 
Could the termination of the boom because of these negative consequences of additional savings be 
prevented? In his analysis of the influence of credit on the formation of savings
38
, Hahn points out 
that no savings could exist without prior granting of credit. The more credit is extended the more 
savings could be generated. “An extension of credit does not only involve an absolute increase of 
savings pro rata of the granted credit, but also that the formation of these additional savings goes 
much quicker and more intensive than the formation of savings which takes place without a prior 
credit expansion” (Ibid: 153). Credit expansion does not only increase but also accelerates the 
formation of savings.
39
 
 
Interestingly, Hahn also argues against the dominant theory, as represented in Cassel‟s explanations 
of the nature and necessity of interest, constructing an inverse relationship between the amount of 
savings and the interest rate. As an observer of practical developments one must come to the 
conclusion that no factor has a lower influence on savings than the interest rate.
40
 In an analysis of 
the laws of savings formation instead one should investigate the influence of fluctuations in income 
on savings. However, in his pre-Keynesian analysis Hahn refers to increases and decreases of 
                                                        
37
 See ibid: 145-6. 
38
 See ibid: 152-5. 
39
 Hahn‟s reference to the consequences of the enormous expansion of credit on savings formation during WW I is not 
conclusive since the war situation is also characterized by a shortage, i.e. a rationing of consumption goods. 
40
 See Hahn (1920/24: 154, n. 147). 
 
  
 11 
individuals and does not go as far as making the overall savings function dependent on income in 
the whole economy. 
 
According to Hahn the upswing is primarily caused by an expansion of credit which again has its 
main reason in the interest rate policy of the banks. The phenomenon of a glut which is rooted in the 
oversaving discussed before, with its negative consequences on the profitability of firms, causes the 
banks to restrict the granting of credit in the crisis. The resulting increases of interest rates should 
not be interpreted as a shortage of capital, as it is so often the case, but as a shortage of credit and 
trust. Here the government, as a special privileged debtor, in Hahn‟s story41, comes into play. 
Although the state also has to pay interest for its loans, it can transfer the payment to the tax payers 
and therefore does not have to take the burden of interest payments into account in a way a private 
person has to calculate. The state (or the central bank by continuously lowering the interest rate), 
therefore could prevent the termination of the boom. Hahn concludes his analysis with the 
statement: “In theory, at least the assumption of the possibility of a „perpetual boom‟ does not 
belong to the realm of Utopia” (Ibid: 159). No wonder that this enthusiasm in Hahn‟s original 
argument, against the historical background of an enormous increase of public debt in WW I and 
the hyperinflationary processes in Germany and Austria thereafter, has caused just so ardent 
opponents who criticized Hahn‟s Economic Theory of Bank Credit as an “apotheosis of credit 
creation”42. 
 
 
IV. Modifications: Credit (1923) and the 3
rd
 edition of Economic Theory of Bank Credit (1930) 
 
As we have seen in the preceding  section, Hahn belonged to the exponents of the old credit view 
who based their analysis on the benchmark of a cash-saving credit economy in which the limits of 
credit are not drawn clearly.
43
 Banks could determine the amount of credit granted in an 
autonomous and irresponsible way. Hahn‟s argument that capital formation in a pure credit 
economy differs fundamentally from capital formation in a cash economy has been a target of 
critique by many contemporaries.
44
 
 
One of the most noteworthy critics was Hans Neisser who was recognized by Keynes as one of the 
leading neo-Wicksellians in the German language area. Keynes found “Dr. Neisser‟s general 
attitude to monetary problems particularly sympathetic” and hoped “that he may feel the same about 
                                                        
41
 See ibid: 151-2. 
42
 Ellis (1934: 329). 
43
 For a detailed survey comparing old and new credit views see Trautwein (2000). 
44
 See Lampe (1926: 134-5), Haberler (1927:814), Mannstaedt (1927: 13-5), Neisser (1928: 70-1),  
    and Ellis (1934: 329). 
 
  
 12 
my work” (Keynes 1930: 178). Although he regarded Hahn‟s distinction between primary banks 
creating credit, “the issuing bank of the modern economy” (Hahn 1920/24: 58), and secondary 
banks where the deposits appear quite fruitful, Neisser nevertheless criticized Hahn for denying the 
difference between the granting of credit by money creation and the granting of credit from saving 
deposits.
45
 It would never be decisive whether a deposit had been generated by paying in cash or by 
the granting of credit but solely whether the deposit could be used for payments, i.e. exerting the 
function of money. It must be clear that additional credit could be created only by those banks 
which keep cheque accounts, and therefore are the carrier of cashless payments, i.e. exactly those 
deposit banks which can increase the amount of money in the economy by lending out again the 
cash flowing to them, by simultaneously keeping the cheque deposits. 
 
A similar but even harsher critique had been raised by Bortkiewicz and Haberler. Bortkiewicz 
found fault with Hahn‟s classification of two types of banks which was only the result of ignoring 
the possibility that a bank could operate alternately on the active and the passive side.
46
 Haberler 
emphasized that the primary bank must become passive against the secondary bank in the clearing 
process and that it therefore becomes dependent on the latter since it can give credit only up to an 
amount that the passive balance is granted a deferred payment.
47
 Furthermore, Haberler criticized 
Hahn‟s statement that credit banks are independent from the central bank in their expansion of 
credit
48
, pointing to the evident contradiction with Hahn‟s statement on the same page that the 
central bank has at its disposal the drastic means to deny the rediscounting of bankable papers. 
 
Haberler was also among the first fellow economists to notice that since the first publication of 
Economic Theory of Bank Credit in 1920 Hahn had considerably watered down his radical position, 
that in particular his “Credit” essay (Hahn 1923) bears “conservative features”49. It is the more 
astonishing that a year later Hahn published his book without any changes. In retrospect Hahn 
himself stated that the much more moderate, completely revised 3
rd
 edition of his Economic Theory 
of Bank Credit, published in 1930, had already been foreshadowed in his contribution on “Kredit” 
to the Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften. He attributed his modified views on money and 
credit to the experiences with the hyperinflation in Weimar Germany in the early 1920s and 
summarized his new insights in the following points
50
:  
 
1. There are limits to inflationary credit expansion in the long run, emphasized in the final section 
of Hahn (1930: 151-3), and the credit inflations which characterize the German economy since 
                                                        
45
 See Neisser (1928: 60-1). 
46
 See Bortkiewicz (1922: 81-2). 
47
 See Haberler (1927: 811-2). 
48
 See Hahn (1920/24: 88). 
49
 Haberler (1927: 819). 
50
 See Hahn (1963: 11-3). 
 
  
 13 
1870 show that such developments can undermine the value of money which makes it necessary to 
weigh the pros and cons of credit extension. 
2. As a consequence of the autonomous credit creation power of banks which makes possible the 
conjunctures, an “economic theory of bank credit” must be formulated as a business-cycle theory. 
3. Credit expansions may help to overcome depressions, but they should never be used in boom 
periods to perpetuate them or to make bearable structural maladjustments, particularly excessive 
wages. “A timely stabilization of the conjuncture, not their stimulation on and on by inflation is 
desirable” (Ibid: 12). 
4. A failure in the limit of credit expansion results in progressive inflation and a possible ruin of 
state finances. 
 
This retrospective view which is full of warnings against the inflationary dangers of excessive credit 
extensions, was not yet fully developed in 1923. However, it is in his article on “Credit” that Hahn 
takes up Schumpeter‟s distinction between “normal” and “abnormal” credit and develops the 
distinction between “non-inflationary” credit, granted in the amount of overall savings in the 
economy, and “inflationary” credit, which transcends these savings due to the money-creating 
ability of the banking sector. 
 
Section II deals with “Credit and Capital”, as Schumpeter does in chapter 3 of his Theory of 
Economic Development. Hahn praises the classics, in particular Ricardo, for distinguishing clearly 
between a low interest rate as the consequence of high savings and a low interest rate because of an 
increase in the quantity of money due to inflationary credit expansion. Whereas the quantity theory 
of money was appropriate for their time, this does not hold any longer for a modern economy with a 
high amount of cashless payments which induces a potential for the private banks to create money 
and credit. For such an economy capital formation is the result of the granting of credit, provided 
the credit is spent for investive purposes. Hahn keeps his earlier view also in arguing against Lexis, 
whom he replaced as the author of the contribution on “Kredit” to the fourth edition of the 
Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften. This comprehensive handbook, first published in six 
volumes between 1890 and 1894 (with two supplements in 1895/97), a second and third edition 
soon to follow in 1898-1901, respectively 1909-11, was edited by Johannes Conrad in cooperation 
with Ludwig Elster, Wilhelm Lexis and the law professor Edgar Loening. Within a short time the 
Handbook became an “indispensable tool of study for any economist of German tongue”, as 
Bortkiewicz (1915: 330) noticed in his obituary on Lexis, his former teacher. Due to the deaths of 
Lexis (1914), Conrad (1915) and Loening (1919), Elster was the only remaining editor when the 
fourth and completely revised edition of the Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften was 
published in nine volumes since 1923, in cooperation with the two new editors Adolf Weber and 
Friedrich Wieser. Vol. 6 contained the famous article by Arthur Spiethoff on crises. 
 
  
 14 
 
In 1923 Hahn sharpened his argument in disputing the view held earlier by Lexis. He pointed out 
“that the dilemma remains that, on the one hand, it is theoretically incontestable that the granting of 
credit is no production, and that only production can produce goods, and that, on the other hand, the 
capital-formative power of credit practically likewise cannot be ignored” (Hahn 1923: 946). This 
dilemma could not be solved if one would stick to the classical view shared by Lexis. “Capital 
formation ceteris paribus is not a question of the production of goods but a question of distribution, 
the distribution of goods, and that of the distribution of goods in intertemporal as well as 
interpersonal relation” (Ibid, italics in original). An intertemporal transfer of consumption into the 
future implies a change in the distribution of current goods. Insofar as the granting of credit is based 
on voluntary savings the change in distribution is a temporary one because current savers can 
consume more goods in the future whose production they have made possible. In the case of 
inflationary credit, however, the change in distribution becomes definitive because the price 
increases reduce the real purchasing power of receivers of fixed incomes who now are suffering 
from forced savings, i.e. an involuntary reduction of consumption (Ibid: 951). This “expropriation” 
is either provisional, as is the case for workers whose wages will be adjusted to the price increases 
so that they regain their earlier share in the social product, or permanent as for rentiers because 
inflation has eroded the basis of their real purchasing power for all times. Thus inflation has 
permanent consequences on the distribution of income and wealth. Whereas the owners of real 
assets and the debtors in industry, agriculture and wealth are among the winners, the owners of 
money wealth, creditors and all receivers of income which is adjusted with a time lag are among the 
losers. 
 
Credit expansion does not only affect distribution but also production. Inflationary credit expansion 
leads to an increase in overall demand which on its part stimulates the production of goods. Hahn 
considers the economic “organism” as “elastic” so that hitherto underutilized resources could be 
activated. However, he now distinguishes between consumptive credits, among which the 
consumptive government loans are the most important ones, and productive credits which lead to 
capital formation. The latter play the dominant role in the modern economy and bring about a 
strong link between credit and capital. 
 
In the third and completely revised edition of Economic Theory of Bank Credit Hahn (1930) keeps 
the leitmotiv of the founder of the modern credit theory Macleod on the cover page but eliminates 
not only the vision of a permanent boom but also some other of his earlier more radical statements. 
He now mentions Mises, Hayek and Stucken in the Introduction as representatives of the monetary 
theory of production sharing his basic views (Ibid: XIX), and integrates the distinction between 
non-inflationary and inflationary credit expansion as a core of Part I. He still regards the underlining 
 
  
 15 
of the relative independence of credit expansion from preceding or simultaneous savings as a main 
purpose of his work as well as the showing of the theoretical and practical importance of 
inflationary credit expansion. However, he does not open his own reflections on the link between 
credit and capital with the dictum “Capital formation is not the result of saving but of the granting 
of credit” any longer, but with the raising of the “central question of capital theory how much the 
stock of capital is enlarged by the granting of a new credit on the level of the individual borrower as 
well as in the economy as a whole” (Ibid: 127). He now also points out that the stimulating effect of 
credit occasionally could be a rather provisional one (Ibid: 152). 
 
V. The Schumpeter-Hahn type of cycle theory 
 
In his Introduction to the third edition Hahn (1930:XVII) points out that he had based his Economic 
Theory of Bank Credit (1920) on the overall economic views of Schumpeter, but that otherwise a 
work on the creation of purchasing power by the banks had no role model in the newer German 
literature. The importance of credit to finance innovational investment activities is at the very centre 
of Schumpeter‟s Theory of Economic Development, which has been classified by Hahn (1920/24: 4) 
as “epoch-making”. There Schumpeter defined “the kernel of the credit phenomenon in the 
following manner: credit is essentially the creation of purchasing power for the purpose of 
transferring it to the entrepreneur, but not simply the transfer of existing purchasing power”51. As 
Schumpeter, Hahn emphasized the power of credit to generate a contribution to the social product.
52
 
In the second German edition of his Theory of Economic Development Schumpeter (1926:140) 
reacted to Hahn‟s EconomicTheory of Bank Credit with the addition of a long opening note to 
chapter III on „Credit and Capital‟ in which he explicitly referred the reader “to this original and 
meritorious book, which has essentially advanced our knowledge of the problem”53. In his 
autobiographical reflections on the history of economic thought Hahn (1963: 6) decades later still 
noted that this agreement by Professor Schumpeter was “particularly welcome”. 
 
The early Hahn was, besides Schumpeter, nearly alone in recommending forced savings as a 
desirable economic policy. Schumpeter‟s assumption that available resources are fully utilized in 
the stationary circular flow implies that the carrying out of new combinations requires a reallocation 
of these resources. In his view it is the essential function of credit to enable the innovating 
entrepreneur to withdraw the production factors she needs from their previous employments. The 
consequence of abnormal credit, i.e. financial means not rooted in previous or current savings, is an 
increase of aggregate demand in money terms which leads to an increase in prices. The credit-
induced inflation acts as a tax on the mere managers stiffened in routine actions thereby implying a 
                                                        
51
 Schumpeter (1934: 107). 
52
 See, e.g., Hahn (1920/24: 93). 
53
 Schumpeter (1934: 95, n. 1). 
 
  
 16 
reallocation of productive resources. It is, however, clear that for Schumpeter the spending of credit 
for innovative investments which have a  productivity-enhancing effect is decisive. There is no 
argument in favour of spending the additional money for consumption. This becomes particularly 
evident in Schumpeter‟s statements on capital which is regarded as a fund of purchasing power. 
“Capital is nothing but the lever by which the entrepreneur subjects to his control the concrete 
goods which he needs, nothing but a means of diverting the factors of production to new uses, or of 
dictating a new direction to production.”54 
 
Hahn never was very precise on the question how much available resources were already utilized 
when credit was extended. He emphasized the redistribution of income away from the receivers of 
fixed income, i.e. the rentier class. From the fact that Hahn believed that the effects of additional 
credit are not fully absorbed by inflation, some resources must not have been fully utilized at the 
starting point. In the first and second edition of Economic Theory of Bank Credit Hahn (1920/24) 
also made no clear distinction whether the credit was used for investive or consumptive purposes. It 
is therefore not surprising that Schumpeter, in the second German edition of Theorie der 
wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, despite all praise, felt obliged to keep some distance from Hahn, 
whose much stronger emphasis on the directly production-enhancing effects of an inflationary 
credit creation had led to widespread accusations of Hahn as an “inflationist”. Schumpeter, for 
whom the inflationary effects/ forced savings of abnormal credit were only of a temporary nature 
due to the additional products entering the market as the consequence of the enlarged production 
capacities, commented with regard to Hahn‟s “otherwise excellent essay” on credit: “Against his 
formulation it appears to me correct to say: Although not by existing goods the quantity of new 
purchasing power that it is possible to create is supported and limited by future goods.”55 Thus 
Schumpeter definitely could not be accused to favour an “apotheosis” of credit creation. However, 
from a marketing-point of view Schumpeter‟s choice of wording was not much better than Hahn‟s 
one. Neither “abnormal” nor “inflationary credit” did sell particularly well against the historical 
background of hyperinflationary processes in Germany and Austria in the early 1920s. Both terms 
missed to give the positive connotation intended to the central view that the main function of credit 
is the financing of economic development, and that it is necessary that the amount of credit granted 
transcends the amount of savings in the economy. 
 
Is it justified to talk of a “Schumpeter-Hahn type of cycle theory” as many commentators did, and 
Hahn himself believed who felt flattered to be classified into one category with such an authority as 
Schumpeter?
56
 For Hahn typical conjunctures are “alternating credit inflations and deflations” 
                                                        
54
 Schumpeter (1934: 116; italics in original). 
55
 Schumpeter (1926: 165; italics in original). 
56
 There is only one argument where Hahn (1920/24) explicitly disagrees with Schumpeter, i.e. the latter‟s zero interest-
hypothesis for a stationary economy. See Hahn (1920/24: 126-7, n. 115). 
 
  
 17 
(Hahn 1930: 152). He wrote a long and overall very positive review (Hahn 1924a) of the second 
German edition of Mises‟s Theory of Money and Credit, which was published in the very same year 
as the unchanged and more radical second edition of his own Economic Theory of Bank Credit. 
Hahn‟s theory of money and credit from the beginning was a business-cycle theory. He identified 
credit cycles as the main cause of cyclical fluctuations. During the 1920s he became closer and 
closer to Mises and Hayek
57
 who blamed the banking sector with its too generous granting of 
money and credit for causing cyclical fluctuations in which the bust is the inevitable correction of 
the excesses of the boom. It might be argued that Hahn contributed to the breakthrough of monetary 
business-cycle theory in Germany, with Mises and Hayek representing the more conservative 
position and the early Hahn the radical one.
58
 
 
Hahn‟s 1923 essay on “Credit” marks the beginning of his transformation to a more moderate and 
finally a strong anti-Keynesian position. He is not talking any longer of the idea of a perpetual 
boom but still points to credit extension as a strong means to stimulate economic development of a 
country by full utilization of its factors of production, although at the price of the relative 
expropriation of the owners of money. He finishes his essay with the statement “that it is the task of 
an aim-conscious credit policy to guide the economy through the Skylla of economic stagnation and 
the Charybdis of depreciation of money and crises” (Hahn 1923: 953). This statement also reveals a 
difference to Schumpeter who always had emphasized the wavelike movement of economic 
development and the positive selective function of economic crises.
59
 
 
It was Schumpeter‟s view that The Theory of Economic Development is dedicated to the problem of 
the business cycle, and that analyzing business cycles “means neither more nor less than analyzing 
the economic process of the capitalist era” (Schumpeter 1939: V). He took over emphasis on the 
central role of technical progress from Marx and made innovations the essential determinant of 
wavelike movements of capitalist economies, integrating the study of business cycles with an 
analysis of long-run economic development. Innovations are not only the decisive impulse of 
cyclical fluctuations but the period of their implementation also determines the different length of 
the cycles. Whereas in 1911, when he published The Theory of Economic Development, only the 
classical business cycle or “Juglar cycle” was known, Schumpeter later integrated the “Kitchin” and 
particularly the “Kondratieff” into his Business Cycles. Schumpeter‟s monocausality argument 
comes out very clear in his statement: “Innovations, their immediate and ulterior effects and the 
response to them by the system, are the common “cause” of them all, although different types of 
innovations and different kinds of effects may play different roles in each” (Schumpeter 1939: 172). 
 
                                                        
57
 See, for example, Hahn (1930: 141, n. 125). 
58
 See Holtfrerich (1989: 123) and Hardach (1989: 166-7). 
59
 See Hagemann (2003). 
 
  
 18 
What role does credit play in this business-cycles story? Although he dates back capitalism as far 
back as the element of credit creation, for Schumpeter, in remarkable contrast to Hahn, the credit 
system does not play the role of an active producer of business cycles but rather a passive role. “It 
adapts itself to the demand which comes from entrepreneurs and submits to contraction by their 
repayment of loans” (Schumpeter 1931: 17). Thus Schumpeter points out the endogeneity of credit 
creation and credit deflation and therefore might be called a “horizontalist”. Schumpeter thus shared 
Wicksell‟s view that the disturbance between the natural and the money rate of interest arises on the 
real side because an improvement in profit expectations due to technical advances causes an 
increase in the natural rate of interest and investment demand. Whereas in Schumpeter‟s system 
money and credit are subordinated to the real cycle determined by innovations, Hahn on the other 
hand identified the decisive cause of cyclical fluctuations in the money and credit-generating power 
of the banking system. Since monetary factors, in particular credit expansion, cause cyclical 
fluctuations his Economic Theory of Bank Credit essentially is a monetary theory of the business 
cycle. There are therefore some stronger parallels between Hahn and Mises as well as Hayek who 
emphasize the monetary impulse as decisive, i.e. an intervention of the banking system leading to 
an “artificial” lowering of the money rate of interest and thus causing deviations of the money rate 
of interest from the natural or equilibrium rate. Hayek, although emphasizing that monetary factors 
cause the cycle, stressed that real phenomena, in particular structural disproportionalities in 
production, constitute the cycle, as elaborated in his Prices and Production. Interestingly, in his 
review article of the second German edition of Mises‟s Theory of Money and Credit Hahn (1924a: 
515) criticizes Mises for taking the “mysterious “natural rate of interest” of Wicksell, like so many 
other economists, as “much too serious”. Cassel, so Hahn, had proved that the “natural rate of 
interest” does not exist at all and that therefore the new interest formed as the consequence of 
inflationary credit could not be a natural rate. Hahn overlooked that Wicksell, although focusing in 
his cumulative process analysis on price level fluctuations caused by divergences between the 
natural and the market rate of interest, nevertheless held a real view of the cycle in which he 
identified technical progress as the decisive cause.
60
 Hahn, however, also in remarkable contrast to 
Schumpeter, nowhere in his writings on business cylces made innovations a regression line of his 
argument.
61
 The parallels with Schumpeter therefore are limited so that the notion of a 
“Schumpeter-Hahn type of cycle theory” should be given up. 
 
VI. L.A. Hahn : the “pre-Keynesian” anti-Keynesian 
 
                                                        
60
 For a clear exposition see Laidler (1991: 143-6). 
61
 Hahn has this in common with Clément Juglar (1819-1905) who was praised by Schumpeter as the founder of 
modern business-cycle theory. In contrast to Hahn, however, Juglar emphasized the role of speculation fuelled by easy 
credit as the cause for an overheated boom. For a comparison of the business-cycle theories of Juglar and Schumpeter 
see Dal-Pont Legrand and Hagemann (2007). 
 
  
 19 
“All that is wrong and exaggerated in Keynes I said much earlier and more clearly.”62 This is the 
leitmotiv of Hahn‟s writings on Keynes ever since he wrote an early review on the General Theory 
in his Swiss exile.
63
 This self-stylization has engraved on a large part of the later Hahn literature. It 
found a particular resonance ground among his liberal friends. Thus we find Gottfried Haberler 
arguing in the Festschrift given to Hahn on the occasion of his 70th birthday that the Economic 
Theory of Bank Credit “anticipated as is generally known large parts of Keynes‟ General Theory” 
(Haberler 1959:26), without Haberler specifying these parts. Wilhelm Röpke went even further in 
claiming that the sins of his youth confessed by Hahn were nothing else than the “anticipated follies 
of age of the Keynes of the General Theory” (Röpke 1959: 69-70). 
 
Fritz Machlup who was well known for his playing on words in his contribution “Why not 
Hahnism?” instead of Keynesianism did not only make puns but raised two serious questions: “1. If 
Hahn is such an ardent anti-Keynesian, why is he so eager to publicize his pre-Keynesian 
Keynesianism? 2. If Hahn‟s early teachings anticipated Keynes‟, why did they not attain the wide 
vogue that Keynesianism has attained?” (Machlup 1959: 50). Among the different hypotheses 
possible, Machlup favoured as an answer to the first psychological question the “fact that the world 
lends a more sympathetic ear to repenting sinners, to converted believers, and to cured heretics” 
(Ibid: 51). Machlup accepted Hahn‟s claim that he had anticipated Keynes‟s General Theory in the 
most important propositions in his own Economic Theory of Bank Credit, as it had been 
documented by Hahn in chapter 16 “Continental European Pre-Keynesianism” of The Economics of 
Illusion, a book which is dedicated to his fight against Keynesianism and inflationism: There Hahn 
confronts quotations from his Economic Theory of Bank Credit with quotations in Keynes General 
Theory on sixteen issues in the sections on „The Consumption Deficit‟, „The Investment Gap‟, 
„Interest and Liquidity‟, ‟Interest and Employment‟, „General Recommendations to Combat 
Unemployment‟ and „Recommendations to Combat Cyclical Depressions: An Easy Money Policy 
and Government Spending‟ (Hahn 1949: 213-227). As one decisive answer to the question why 
Keynes in 1936 and not Hahn in 1920/24 found a resonance ground among fellow economists and 
the general public Machlup rightly refers to the bad timing of Hahn‟s original ideas. In the early 
1920s many countries suffered from severe inflations whereas in the 1930s they suffered from 
depression and associated deflationary processes. 
 
Interestingly, Wilhelm Röpke, who after WW II was as staunch an anti-Keynesian as L. Albert 
Hahn, in his contribution to the Hahn Festschrift stated that the Great Depression, when many 
economists kept their orthodox views and thereby demonstrated a lack of insight and understanding 
in the opposite direction, was a situation when (Keynesian) “folly exceptionally became wisdom” 
                                                        
62
 Hahn (1963: 6). The statement first was made explicitly in Henry Hazlitts‟ Introduction to Hahn‟s The Economics of 
Illusion (Hahn 1949: 1). 
63
 See Neue Zürcher Zeitung 19-20 November 1936. 
 
  
 20 
(Röpke 1959: 70). It must be pointed to the fact that both Hahn as well as Röpke despite their 
liberal views were arguing against a conjuncture-policy nihilism in the pre-Nazi German debate 
during the Great Depression in 1931/32 favouring expansionary measures.
64
 
 
Hahn‟s “proto-Keynesianism” (and even his “proto-Monetarism”65) has also been discussed in more 
recent contributions, as well as his conversion from pre-Keynesianism to anti-Keynesianism. In 
particular Hesse has shown convincingly “that the question of Hahn‟s precursorship was strongly 
woven into the particular self-construction of his biography” and that “it was Hahn himself who 
brought his own work into the discussion about the roots and the critics of Keynesianism” (Hesse 
2007: 226). How much was Hahn‟s claim of anticipation of Keynes‟s General Theory justified, or 
how much was this claim only a strategy of self-marketing? 
 
Whereas there is no simple and easy answer to the precursor question, Hahn‟s later anti-
Keynesianism is evident. This is not only documented by his Economics of Illusion, a pamphlet 
against Keynes and Keynesianism, but also by his parallel German article on the “fundamental 
errors” in Keynes‟s General Theory (Hahn 1949a) which caused a fierce controversy with Erich 
Schneider (1952), a former research associate of Schumpeter at the University of Bonn and the 
leading Keynesian (of the neoclassical synthesis view) and long-time chairman of the Theoretical 
Committee of the Verein für Socialpolitik in post-WW II Germany. This anti-Keynesian spirit is 
also kept in Hahn‟s Common Sense Economics which he confronts with illusion economics. This 
confrontation also comes out very clearly in the leitmotiv which Hahn (1956) gave his book on the 
front page: “The propensity to work, and not the propensity to spend, is the foundation of national 
income and wealth.” 
 
What about Hahn‟s claim of having anticipated Keynes? In his detailed analysis of possible 
anticipators of the General Theory Patinkin (1982) summarily dismisses all German economists for 
his considerations. In doing this Patinkin (p. 6) explicitly refers to Garvy (1975) and the limited 
perspective that claims of anticipations imply the advocating of public works whereas Keynes‟s 
book is concerned with theory. Patinkin, however, was misled by Garvy who had focused almost 
exclusively on the economic activists and the policy conclusions of the reformers instead of on their 
theoretical analyses from which they cannot be separated. Patinkin is right in his claim that as a 
serious candidate for an anticipator of Keynes only an economist could be considered who made 
important building blocks of Keynes‟s theory of employment, interest and money a regression line 
of her or his argument. 
 
                                                        
64
 For greater details see Bombach et al. (1981: 34-46 and 309-353). 
65
 See Boudreaux/Selgin (1990) and Leeson (1998). 
 
  
 21 
Patinkin‟s claim has been accepted and anticipated by Machlup, a confessing friend of Hahn, who 
despite his contention “that Hahn anticipated many of the most widely quoted propositions of 
Keynes‟ book”, concedes that “there is something in Keynes‟ work that is absent from Hahn‟s 
work: an integrated conceptual apparatus and a set of analytical tools” (Machlup 1959: 52). Thus 
Machlup distinguishes between Keynesian policies and Keynesian tools, such as the consumption 
function, the investment function, or the liquidity preference function, which “are useful tools of 
analysis regardless of any particular theory about aggregate spending and income with full 
employment or unemployment” (Ibid). 
 
Probably the first historian of economic thought discussing explicitly parallels between Hahn and 
Keynes was Eduard Heimann
66
 (1945: 231-6). Heimann pointed to the fact that Hahn (1920/24) had 
revised Malthusian ideas of effective demand, and that rising investment activities fuelled by credit 
extension should offset rising saving. But Heimann, although emphasizing that this thesis is also at 
the very centre of Keynes‟ theory, also stresses that “Keynes goes far beyond Wicksell and Hahn in 
developing the theory of saving and investment” (Ibid: 234) and that Keynes‟s liquidity preference 
theory of interest “assumes a new dimension in comparison with those of Schumpeter and Hahn, 
which connect interest only with the liquidity preference of the credit-issuing banks” (Ibid: 235). 
 
Keynes himself had referred to Hahn‟s article on „Kredit‟ in his Treatise (I: 154, n. 1), together with 
Mises‟s Theory of Money and Credit and Schumpeter‟s Theory of Economic Development as 
important German contributions in which “the notion of the distinction which I have made 
between savings and investment has been gradually creeping into economic literature in quite recent 
years”. Keynes here was also discussing the notion of „forced saving‟ but already preferred “not to 
use the word „saving‟ in this connection”. Later, in the General Theory, Keynes completely 
distanced himself from „forced saving‟ as a useful notion for conditions of less than full 
employment
67
 and called it one of “the worst muddles” of the “neo-classical school” (Ibid: 183). In 
that context Keynes emphasized: “Saving and investment are the determinates of the system, not the 
determinants. They are the twin results of the system‟s determinants, namely, the prosperity to 
consume, the schedule of the marginal efficiency of capital and the rate of interest” (Ibid). No doubt 
that Hahn had not developed an equivalent theoretical system and could not be recognized as an 
anticipator of Keynes in that sense. Hahn himself even in his Economics of Illusion points out that 
he regards “as entirely correct the functional relationship as outlined by Keynes; what we object to 
is not his theoretical concept” but “certain basic assumptions about wage inflexibility, which were 
introduced by Keynes as valid „in the general case‟ and „as a rule‟” (Hahn 1949:119). 
 
                                                        
66
 Also an émigré from Nazi Germany and a colleague of Hahn at the New School Heimann (1889-1967) knew Hahn‟s 
writings well. 
67
 See Keynes (1973: 79-81). 
 
  
 22 
Hahn‟s critic Schneider concedes that there are similarities between Hahn and Keynes on some 
issues but  emphasizes that Hahn was not the only economist who had anticipated elements of 
Keynes‟s construction. His own favourite was Nicholas Johannsen (1908) who had already 
anticipated the whole “savings-investment building block of the Keynesian system” and got a 
prominent place in Lawrence Kleins‟s discussions of anticipations of the General Theory.68 
Johannsen would fit perfectly into Hahn‟s view that scientific progress very often is only possible 
with the help and stimulus of external heretics, but Hahn was not particularly interested to compare 
his own work with those of other “anticipators” of Keynes. Schneider (p. 398) rightly criticized 
Hahn for his interpretation that Keynes throughout his analysis makes the assumption of rigid 
wages and thereby neglects chapters 19 („Changes in Money Wages‟) and 21 („The Theory of 
Prices‟). Furthermore, it is a gross misunderstanding that in the Keynesian system “output and 
employment … can only expand if (the amount of money) has been inflated” (Hahn 1949: 229). 
None of the “anticipators” had developed an elaborate theory of income and employment such as 
Keynes did in his General Theory.
69
 Hahn‟s new views on savings, as expressed in chapter 9 („Is 
Saving a Virtue or a Sin‟) of The Economics of Illusion, such as those that saving does not reduce 
effective demand and “Saving or oversaving does not create unemployment” (Hahn 1949: 103) 
were extremely astonishing and disappointing for an author who contributed to the development of 
modern credit theory, of which one of the most important insights is that demand for credit is 
independent from the amount of voluntary savings and that the latter can differ from voluntary 
investment.
70
 Schneider identifies the reason for Hahn‟s confusion in the fact that Hahn mixes up 
the values for saving and investment ex ante with those ex post, and regrets that an author who 
made a main contribution to the modern economic theory of bank credit wastes his time and energy 
for a hopeless task, i.e. the fight against a scientific apparatus which had turned out to be very 
fruitful.
71
 
 
A similar and highly interesting critique was made by George N. Halm (1901-84) who after his 
emigration from Nazi Germany in 1936 made a career at Tufts University and the related Fletcher 
School of Law and Diplomacy. Halm, undoubtedly a liberal economist who had shared Hayek‟s 
position in the socialist calculation debate of the 1930s, was very critical against the early excesses 
and exaggerated optimism in the original version of Hahn‟s Economic Theory of Bank Credit. The 
main point of Halm‟s critique, however, consists in the fact that Hahn, who is so proud of having 
                                                        
68
 See Schneider (1952: 395-6) and Klein (1966: ch. V, in particular pp. 143-7). 
Keynes described Nicholas Johannsen (1844-1928) in Vol. II of his Treatise as an “American amateur economist 
(crank, some might say)” whose “doctrine of „Impair savings‟, i.e. of savings withheld from consumption expenditure 
but not embodied in capital expenditure and so causing entrepreneurs who have produced goods for consumption to sell 
them at a loss, seems to me to come very near to the truth” (Treatise II, 1971: 90). For a discussion of Johannsen‟s early 
analysis of the saving-investment process and the multiplier see Hagemann and Rühl (1987). 
69
 See Schneider: 401 and 396. 
70
 Ibid: 402. 
71
 See ibid: 403. 
 
  
 23 
anticipated the main theses of Keynes, does overlook that in his untiring fight against Keynesian 
economic policy he is not really attacking Keynes but his own much more radical earlier views. In 
contrast to Hahn (1920/24) Keynes neither propagated the idea of a permanent boom nor had he 
been an inflationist. “By his equating of Hahn (1920) and Keynes (1936) he Hahn] imputes to 
Keynes unconsciously inflationary ideas which either did not exist at all or indeed were much softer 
than his own ones” (Halm 1963: 382). 
 
Ironically, the only time Hahn had quoted Keynes in the three editions of Economic Theory of Bank 
Credit, together with Irving Fisher, is in the context to avoid fluctuations in the general level of 
prices by monetary policy, since public opinion does not accept significant inflation any longer.
72
 
So, ironically the Hahn of the 1930 vintage did not recognize Keynes as an inflationist, on the 
contrary. Halm‟s reference to Keynes‟s “How to Pay for the War” (1940) may be taken as a good 
indicator that Keynes did not change his view on inflation with the General Theory or after. 
 
 
VII. Conclusion 
 
“‟Some more attention for foreign achievements‟ one wants to shout out to Hahn” Bortkiewicz 
(1921-22: 88) concludes who reminds Hahn of the contributions of Lexis
73
 on Credit and Böhm-
Bawerk on capital theory. He also rightly criticizes Hahn for the severe misspellings of the names 
of prominent economists.
74
 More important, Bortkiewicz criticized Hahn for not even having read 
the writings of his hero Macleod properly, who despite his strange use of the term “capital” had 
been a critic of excessive credit creation. For example, Macleod had criticized the American 
practice of the issuing of bank notes against government bonds and of “Lawism”, and had been a 
bimetallist for whom gold and silver were the only proper basis of paper money (Ibid). For 
Bortkiewicz Hahn was “a practitioner with a bent to theory” (Ibid: 71) who put emphasis on the fact 
that the important operations in the modern banking business happen on the active side and that “the 
passive operations of banks is nothing else than a reflex of preceding granting of credit” (Hahn 
1920/24: 29). 
 
Hahn‟s self-marketing and his self-declaration as a “pre-Keynesian” who later mutated to a fierce 
anti-Keynesian has led many interpreters astray, as comes out in excessive modernistic 
                                                        
72
 See Hahn (1930: 147-8). Surprisingly, this reference to Keynes – to the best of my knowledge – has been completely 
overlooked in the ‟Hahn literature‟. Even Hesse (2007), the best essay on Hahn‟s biography and the link with his 
economics, wrongly comments that “Hahn never quoted Keynes‟s works in the several editions of The Economic 
Theory of Bank Credit” (Ibid: 224). 
73
 Perhaps as a reaction Hahn (1930: 129) for the first time in his Economic Theory of Bank Credit refers to Lexis as a 
representative of the traditional view on credit and capital. 
74
 For example, Wicksell figures throughout as Wicksel and Böhm-Bawerk most of the time as Böhm-Bawerck. These 
misspellings were not corrected in the second edition. 
 
  
 24 
interpretations making him “a precursor of Keynesianism and the monetarist counterrevolution” 
(Boudreaux and Selgin). One should not overlook that Hahn never gave up the “basic principle of 
his business cycle- and employment theory”, which comes out in the speech he gave in 1962 on the 
occasion of receiving the honorary doctorate from the University of Marburg which he concluded 
with confirming: “All expansion of credit causes an expansion of goods due a change in their 
distribution. Credit takes the goods out of nothing, where they would have remained without credit 
extension.”75 Hahn only added that this fundamental principle had to be applied with care, which 
apparently in his own view he had not done in 1920. This statement clearly indicates that Hahn gave 
not up his early insights but only moderated his excessive policy conclusions step by step, also as a 
reaction to the critics. Thus he could not maintain that all credit creation would enhance growth and 
productivity. In contrast to Schumpeter, for example, he was very imprecise at the beginning about 
such decisive questions whether additional credit would be spent for consumption or for innovative 
investment, or whether available resources at the beginning were fully utilized
76
 or underutilized. 
 
The first edition of Economic Theory of Bank Credit was published at the beginning of the 
hyperinflation in Germany and Austria after WW I for which the author made responsible the anti-
theoretical bent of the German historical school, and where he located the roots of his quantity-
theoretic convictions.
77
 Hahn was not alone in blaming the teachings of the historical school for the 
inflation. He was accompanied by many fellow economists such as Eucken and Mises, but it also 
has to be mentioned that German was the language in which Wicksell‟s Interest and Prices had 
been published originally in 1898. Laidler and Stadler (1998) are among the very few who have 
recognized important contributions by Bortkiewicz, Mises and Hahn (1924a)(!) in the interpretation 
of the German hyperinflation which made use of the quantity theory supplemented by an analysis of 
inflation expectations. 
 
Among the few economists who recognized the lasting importance of Hahn‟s Economic Theory of 
Bank Credit for a modern credit theory and monetary theory of business cycles we find such diverse 
authors as Fritz Neumark, an “enlightened” Keynesian, and Friedrich Lutz, an “enlightened” 
monetarist and liberal economist. Neumark (1900-91) was a colleague of Hahn at the Goethe 
University in Frankfurt, who was also dismissed by the Nazis for racial reasons in 1933. After his 
return from Turkish exile in 1952 he became the „Nestor‟ of German public finance and in 1980 the 
founding chairman of the History of Economic Thought Committee of the Verein für Socialpolitik. 
Neumark appreciated the lasting contribution of Hahn‟s pioneering work and regretted Hahn‟s later 
                                                        
75
 See Hahn (1963: 13; 1930: 125-6, and 1920/24: 141); italics in 1963 and in the third edition (1930) but not in the 
original of The Economic Theory of Bank Credit (Hahn 1920/24)! 
76
 This is the assumption in the business-cycle theories of such diverse authors as Schumpeter and Hayek, and the only 
constellation for which Keynes (1936: 80-1) accepted ‟forced saving‟ as a ”perfectly clear notion“. 
77
 See Hahn (1963: 8-9). 
 
  
 25 
strong anti-Keynesian crusade. In denouncing it as a Jugendsünde Hahn “had done injustice to 
himself” (Neumark 2004: 92). 
 
Lutz (1901-75) had made an academic career in Princeton after emigrating from Nazi Germany in 
1937. In 1953 he moved to Zurich. Lutz made major contributions to the theories of interest, 
investment, and currency problems and was an active member of the Mont Pelerin Society. In his 
contribution to the Festschrift for Hahn he preferred the term “Jugendblüte”, i.e. the blossoming of 
the youth, to the term Jugendsünde, and pointed out that Hahn in 1920 had been a member of the 
avant-garde. Although Hahn‟s bold ideas, such as the denouncation of bourgeois virtues as saving, 
were “shocking in the extreme” (Lutz 1959: 48) at the time they were published, they nevertheless 
were “full of verve, unorthodox and stimulating”, so that again he had “a small love” for Hahn‟s 
1920 Economic Theory of Bank Credit (Ibid: 49). 
 
Hahn is in a line with Wicksell and Schumpeter in emphasizing the importance of credit for a 
modern economy. Banks are producers of credit which is not limited by the amount of saving. 
Interest is not the price which equalizes savings  with the demand for credit but the price for a 
higher liquidity. Demand for credit creates its own supply. Capital was seen by Hahn as the result of 
credit creation and not of saving. Over time Hahn moderated some exaggerations of the first two 
editions of The Economic Theory of Bank Credit, such as the idea of a permanent boom and 
inflationary credit hardly with any limits, which brought him closer to Mises and Hayek. 
Furthermore, he partly overcame the lack of precision concerning some important issues such as the 
question whether available resources are fully utilized or underutilized when additional credit is 
granted, and became more cautious with regard to the limits of credit creation. His self-marketing as 
an important precursor of Keynes, in combination with his fierce anti-Keynesianism, was 
exaggerated and did not do justice to Keynes. It also was counter-productive  concerning the lasting 
importance of his own Economic Theory of Bank Credit. 
 
References 
 
Anderson, O. (1929), Zur Problematik der empirisch-statistischen Konjunkturforschung, Bonn: 
Verlag Kurt Schroeder. 
Bombach, G. u. a. (1981), Der Keynesianismus III. Die geld- und beschäftigungstheoretische 
Diskussion in Deutschland zur Zeit von Keynes, Berlin/Heidelberg/New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Bortkiewicz, L.v. (1915), “Wilhelm Lexis“, Bulletin de l’Institut International de Statistique, 20: 
328-332. 
Bortkiewicz, L.v. (1922), “Das Wesen, die Grenzen und die Wirkungen des Bankkredits“, 
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 17: 70-89. 
 
  
 26 
Boudreaux, D.J., Selgin, G.A. (1990), “L. Albert Hahn: a precursor of Keynesianism and the 
monetarist counterrevolution”, History of Political Economy, 22: 261-279. 
Caspari, V. (2004), “Die Volkswirtschaftslehre an der Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaftlichen 
Fakultät der Universität Frankfurt am Main von der Wiedereröffnung nach dem Kriege bis in 
die 70er Jahre“, in Schefold (ed.): 464-492. 
Dal-Pont Legrand, M. and Hagemann, H. (2007), “Business Cycles in Juglar and Schumpeter”, The 
History of Economic Thought, 49(1): 1-18. 
Ellis, H.S. (1934), German Monetary Theory: 1905-1933, Cambridge/Mass.: Harvard University 
Press. 
Garvy, G. (1975), “Keynes and the Economic Activists of Pre-Hitler Germany”,  Journal of 
Political Economy, 83: 391-405. 
Haberler, G. (1927), “Albert Hahns Volkswirtschaftliche Theorie des Bankkredits“, Archiv für 
Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 57:803-820, abridged English translation in: Hahn 
(1949a), pp. 253-259. 
Haberler, G. (1959), “Against the Stream and against the Cycle!”, in Muthesius (ed.): 26-29. 
Hagemann, H. (2003), “Schumpeter‟s Early Contributions on Crisis Theory and Business-Cycle 
Theory”, History of Economic Ideas, 11: 47-67. 
Hagemann, H. and Rühl, C. (1987), ”Nicholas Johannsen‟s early analysis of the saving-investment 
process and the multiplier“, Studi Economici 42: 99-143. 
Hahn, L.A. (1919), “Der Gegenstand des Geld- und Kapitalmarktes in der modernen Wirtschaft. 
Ein Beitrag zur Theorie des Bankgeschäfts“, Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 
46: 163-213. 
Hahn, L.A: (1920), Volkswirtschaftliche Theorie des Bankkredits, Tübingen 1920: J.C.B. Mohr 
(Paul Siebeck); 2nd ed. 1924; 3rd rev. ed. 1930; Italian translation as Teoria economica del 
credito, edited and introduced by Lapo Berti, Naples 1990: Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane. 
Hahn, L.A. (1923), “Kredit“, in L. Elster, A. Weber, F. Wieser (eds.), Handwörterbuch der 
Staatswissenschaften, 4. ed., Jena: Gustav Fischer, Vol. 5: 944-953. 
Hahn, L.A. (1924), Geld und Kredit. Gesammelte Aufsätze, Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck). 
Hahn, L.A. (1924a), “Zur Frage des sogenannten ‟Vertrauens in die Währung‟“, Archiv für 
Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik 52(2): 289-316. 
Hahn, L.A. (1929), Geld und Kredit. Gesammelte Aufsätze. Neue Folge, Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr 
(Paul Siebeck). 
Hahn, A. (1949), “Die Grundirrtümer in Lord Keynes‟ General Theory of Employment, Interest and 
Money”, Ordo, 2: 170-190. 
Hahn, L.A. (1949a), The Economics of Illusion. A Critical Analysis of Contemporary Economic 
Theory and Policy, New York: Squier Publishing. 
 
  
 27 
Hahn. L.A. (1954), Wirtschaftswissenschaft des gesunden Menschenverstandes, Frankfurt am Main: 
Fritz Knapp; Engl. ed.: Common Sense Economics, London 1956: Abelard-Schuman. 
Hahn, L.A. (1963), Fünfzig Jahre zwischen Inflation und Deflation, Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul 
Siebeck). 
Halm, G. (1963), “L. Albert Hahn und John Maynard Keynes“, Zeitschrift für National-ökonomie, 
23: 381-388. 
Hardach, G. (1989), “Der lange Abschied vom Gold: Geldtheorie und Geldpolitik in Deutschland, 
1905-1933“, in: B. Schefold (ed.), Studien zur Entwicklung der ökonomischen Theorie, Vol. 
VIII, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 141-170. 
Hauck, M. (ed.) (2009), Albert Hahn. Ein verstoßener Sohn Frankfurts, Bankier und 
Wissenschaftler. Eine Dokumentation, Frankfurt am Main: Societäts-Verlag. 
Hayek, F.A. (1929), Geldtheorie und Konjunkturtheorie, Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempski; Engl. 
ed. Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle, London: J. Cape 1933. 
Hayek, F.A. (1931), Prices and Production, 2
nd
 ed. London 1935: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Heimann, E. (1945), History of Economic Doctrines, London/Oxford/New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Hesse, J.-O. (2004), “Die Frankfurter Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaftliche Fakultät zwischen 
1933 und 1945“, in Schefold (ed.): 440-463. 
Hesse, J.-O. (2007), “Some Relationships between a Scholar‟s and an Entrepreneur‟s Life. The 
Biography of L. Albert Hahn”, History of Political Economy, 39, Annual Supplement: 215-233. 
Holtfrerich, C.-L. (1989), “Zur Entwicklung der monetären Konjunkturtheorien: Wicksell, 
Schumpeter, Hahn, Mises und Hayek“, in B. Schefold (ed.), Studien zur Entwicklung der 
ökonomischen Theorie, Vol. VIII, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot: 103-140. 
Keynes, J.M. (1930), A Treatise on Money. Vol. I: The Pure Theory of Money. Vol. II: The Applied 
Theory of Money. The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, Vols. V and VI, 
London/Basingstoke/New York 1971: Macmillan and Cambridge University Press. 
Keynes, J.M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. The Collected 
Writings of John Maynard Keynes, Vol. VII, London/Basingstoke/New York 1973: Macmillan 
and Cambridge University Press. 
Klein, L.R. (1949), The Keynesian Revolution, London and Basingstoke: Macmillan Press, 2
nd
 ed. 
1966. 
Kulla, B. (1996), Die Anfänge der empirischen Konjunkturforschung in Deutschland 1925-1933, 
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
Kulla, B. (1999), “Hahn, Ludwig Albert“, in H. Hagemann, C.-D. Krohn (eds.), Biographisches 
Handbuch der deutschsprachigen wirtschaftswissenschaftlichen Emigration nach 1933, 
Munich: K.G. Saur, Vol. I: 225-227. 
Laidler, D. (1991), The Golden Age of the Quantity Theory, New York and London: Philip Allan. 
 
  
 28 
Laidler, D.E.W., Stadler, G.W. (1998), “Monetary Explanations of the Weimar Republic‟s 
Hyperinflation: some Neglected Contributions in Contemporary German Literature”, Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking, 30: 816-831. 
Lampe, A. (1926), Zur Theorie des Sparprozesses und der Kreditschöpfung, Jena: Gustav Fischer. 
Leeson, R. (1998), “Influence (or the Lack of It) in the Economics Profession: The Case of Lucien 
Albert Hahn”, History of Political Economy, 29: 635-638. 
Lutz, F. (1959), “Jugendblüte“, in Muthesius (ed.): 46-49. 
Machlup, F. (1959), “Why not Hahnism?”, in Muthesius (ed.): 50-53. 
Macleod, H.D. (1889-91), The Theory of Credit, 2 vols., London and New York: Longmans, Green 
and Co. 
Mannstaedt, H. (1927), Ein kritischer Beitrag zur Theorie des Bankkredites, Jena: Gustav Fischer. 
Mises, L. v. (1912), Theorie des Geldes und der Umlaufsmittel, Munich and Leipzig: Duncker & 
Humblot. 2nd edition., 1924; English translation as The Theory of Money and Credit, London 
1934: Jonathan Cape, reprinted New Haven 1953: Yale University Press; new edition with 
stylistic changes and footnote corrections, Indianapolis 1981: Liberty Press. 
Mises, L. v. (1928), Geldwertstabilisierung und Konjunkturpolitik, Jena: Gustav Fischer; Engl. 
transl. in Mises on the Manipulation of Money and Credit, ed. by P.L. Greaves, Dobbs Ferry, 
NY 1978: Free Market Books: 57-107. 
Muthesius, V. (ed.)(1959), Eine Freundesgabe für Albert Hahn zum 12. Oktober 1959, Frankfurt 
am Main: Fritz Knapp Verlag. 
Neisser, H. (1928), Der Tauschwert des Geldes, Jena :Gustav Fischer. 
Patinkin, D. (1982), Anticipations of the General Theory? And Other Essays on Keynes, Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Röpke, W. (1959), “Weggefährten - mit zehn Jahren Abstand”, in: Muthesius (ed.): 68-72. 
Schefold, B. (2004), Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaftler in Frankfurt am Main, 2nd enlarged 
ed., Marburg: Metropolis. 
Schneider, E. (1952), “Hahn contra Keynes“, Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft und 
Statistik, 88: 395-404. 
Schumpeter, J. (1911), Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, Munich and Leipzig: Duncker & 
Humblot; 2nd revised ed. 1926. 
Schumpeter, J.A. (1917-18), “Das Sozialprodukt und die Rechenpfennige: Glossen und Beiträge zur 
Geldtheorie von heute“, Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 44: 627-715; Engl. 
transl. by A. Marget, “Money and the Social Product“, International Economic Papers, 6, 
1956: 148-211. 
Schumpeter, J.A. (1931), “The Theory of the Business Cycle“, Keizaigaku-Ronshu – The Journal of 
Economics, 4: 1-32. 
 
  
 29 
Schumpeter, J.A. (1934), The Theory of Economic Development. An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, 
Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, Reprint 
Oxford University Press 1980. 
Schumpeter, J.A. (1939), Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical and Statistical Analysis of the 
Capitalist Process, 2 vols., New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Skaggs, N.T. (1997), “Henry Dunning Macleod and the Credit Theory of Money”, in: A.J. Cohen, 
H. Hagemann, J. Smithin (eds.), Money, Financial Institutions and Macroeconomics, 
Boston/Dordrecht/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 109-123. 
Trautwein, H.-M. (2000), ”The Credit View, Old and New“, Journal of Economic Surveys, 14: 145-
189. 
Wicksell, K. (1898), Geldzins und Güterpreise, Jena: Gustav Fischer; Engl. ed. Interest and Prices, 
London 1936: Macmillan. 
 
  
 
Bisher sind in dieser Reihe erschienen: 
 
 
Eigl R., Experimentielle Methoden in der Mikroökonomik, No. 1, Mai 1991. 
Dockner E., Long N.V., International Pollution Control: Cooperative versus Non-Cooperative Strategies, No. 2, 
September 1991.  
Andraea C.A., Eigl R., Der öffentliche Sektor aus ordnungspolitischer Sicht, No. 3, Oktober 1991. 
Dockner E., A Dynamic Theory of Conjectural Variations, No. 4, Oktober 1991. 
Feichtinger G., Dockner E., Cyclical Consumption Pattern and Rational Addictions, No. 5, Oktober 1991. 
Marterbauer M., Die Rolle der Fiskalpolitik im Schwedischen Wohlfahrtsstaat, No. 6, Dezember 1991. 
Pichler E., Cost-Sharing of General and Specific Training with Depreciation of Human Capital, No. 7, Dezember 
1991. 
Pichler E., Union Wage Bargaining and Status, No. 8, Dezember 1991. 
Pichler E., Costs of Negotiations and the Structure of Bargaining - a Note, No. 9, Dezember 1991. 
Nowotny E., The Austrian Social Partnership and Democracy, No. 10, Dezember 1991. 
Pichler E., Walther H., The Economics of Sabbath, No. 11, April 1992. 
Klatzer E., Unger B., Will Internationalization Lead to a Convergence of National Economic Policies?,No. 12, June 
1992. 
Bellak C., Towards a Flexible Concept of Competitiveness, No. 13, May 1992. 
Koren St., Stiassny A., The Temporal Causality between Government Taxes and Spending, No. 14, August 1992. 
Altzinger W., Ost-West-Migration ohne Steuerungsmöglichkeiten?, No. 15, September 1992. 
Bellack Ch., Outsiders' Response to Europe 1992, Case of Austria, No. 16, December 1992. 
Guger A., Marterbauer M., Europäische Währungsunion und Konsequenzen für die Kollektiv-vertragspolitik, No. 
17, January 1993. 
Unger B., van Waarden F., Characteristics, Governance, Performance and Future Perspectives, No. 18, January 
1993. 
Scharmer F., The Validity Issue in Applied General Equilibrium Tax Models, No. 19, May 1993. 
Ragacs Ch., Minimum Wages in Austria: Estimation of Employment Functions, No. 20, June 1993. 
Ragacs Ch., Employment, Productivity, Output and Minimum Wages in Austria: A Time Series Analysis, No. 21, 
September 1993. 
Stiassny A., TVP - Ein Programm zur Schätzung von Modellen mit zeitvariierenden Parametern, No. 22, 
December 1993. 
Gstach D., Scale Efficiency: Where Data Envelopment Analysis Outperforms Stochastic Production Function 
Estimation, No. 23, December 1993. 
Gstach D., Comparing Structural Efficiency of Unbalanced Subsamples: A Resampeling Adaptation of Data 
Envelopment Analysis, No. 24, December 1993. 
Klausinger H., Die Klassische Ökonomie und die Keynesianische Alternative. Revision ein Mythos?, No. 25, 
December 1993. 
Grandner T., Gewerkschaften in einem Cournot-Duopol. Sequentielle versus simultane Lohnverhandlungen, No. 
26, April 1994. 
Stiasssny A., A Note on Frequency Domain Properties of Estimated VARs, No. 27, June 1994. 
Koren St., Stiassny A., Tax and Spend or Spend and Tax ? An International Study, No. 28, August 1994. 
Gstach D., Data Envelopment Analysis in a Stochastic Setting: The right answer form the wrong model?, No. 29, 
August 1994. 
Cantwell J., Bellak Ch., Measuring the Importance of International Production: The Re-Estimation of Foreign Direct 
Investment at Current Values, No. 30, January 1995. 
Klausinger H., Pigou’s Macroeconomics of Unemployment (1933). A Simple Model, No. 31, February 1995.  
Häfke Ch., Helmenstein Ch., Neural Networks in Capital Markets: An Application to Index Forecasting, No. 32, 
January 1995. 
Hamberger K., Katzmair H., Arithmetische Politik und ökonomische Moral, Zur Genologie der 
Sozialwissenschaften in England, No. 33, May 1995. 
Altzinger W., Beschäftigungseffekte des österreichischen Osthandels, No. 34, July 1995. 
Bellak Ch., Austrian Manufacturing Firms Abroad - The last 100 Years, No. 35, November 1995. 
Stiassny A., Wage Setting, Unemployment and the Phillips Curve, No. 36, January 1996. 
Zagler M., Long-Run Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Model of Endogenous Growth, No. 37, June 1996. 
Traxler F., Bohmann G., Ragacs C., Schreckeneder B., Labour Market Regulation in Austria, No. 38, January, 
1996. 
Gstach D., A new approach to stochastic frontier estimation: DEA+, No. 39, August 1996. 
 
  
 
Bellak Ch., Clement W., Hofer R., Wettbewerbs- und Strukturpolitik: Theoretische Begründung und neuere 
Entwicklungen in Österreich, No. 40, June 1996. 
Nowotny E., Dritter Sektor, Öffentliche Hand und Gemeinwirtschaft, No. 41, August 1996. 
Grandner T., Is Wage-Leadership an Instrument to Coordinate Union’s Wage-Policy? The Case of Imperfect 
Product Markets, No. 42, November 1996. 
Pirker R., The Constitution of Working Time, No. 43, Januar 1997. 
Nowotny E., Konsequenzen einer Globalisierung der Weltwirtschaft für unsere Gesellschaft, No. 44, Januar 1997. 
Grandner T., Territoriale Evolution von Kooperation in einem Gefangenendilemma, No. 45, February 1997. 
Häfke Ch., Sögner L., Asset Pricing under Asymmetric Information, No. 46, February 1997. 
Stiassny A., Die Relevanz von Effizienzlöhnen im Rahmen von Gewerkschaftsverhandlungsmodellen, No. 47, May 
1997. 
Stiassny A., Unsicherheit bezüglich der Preiselastizität der Güternachfrage als reale Rigidität, No. 48, May 1997.  
Klausinger H., Die Alternativen zur Deflationspolitik Brünings im Lichte zeitgenössischer Kritik, No. 49, June 1997. 
Wehinger G.D., Exchange Rate-Based Stabilization: Pleasant Monetary Dynamics?. No. 50, August 1997. 
Wehninger G.D., Are Exchange Rate-Based Stabilizations Expansionary? Theoretical Considerations and the 
Brazilian Case, No. 51, August 1997. 
Huber C., Sögner L., Stern A., Selbstselektierendes Strompreisregulierungsmodell, No. 52, August 1997. 
Ragacs Ch., Zagler M., Economic Policy in a Model of Endogenous Growth, No. 53, October 1997. 
Mahlberg B., Url T., Effects of the Single Market on the Austrian Insurance Industry, No. 54, February 1998.  
Gstach D., Grander T., Restricted Immigration In as Two-Sector Economy, No. 55, March 1998.  
Sögner L., Regulation of a Complementary Imputed Good in a Competitive Environment, No. 56, March 1998. 
Altzinger W., Austria's Foreign Direct Investment in Central and Eastern Europe: 'Supply Based' or Marked 
Driven?, No. 57, April 1998. 
Gstach D., Small Sample Performance of Two Approaches to Technical Efficiency Estimation in Noisy Multiple 
Output Environments, No. 58, June 1998. 
Gstach D., Technical Efficiency in Noisy Multi-Output Settings, No. 59, June 1998. 
Ragacs Ch., Zagler M., Growth Theories and the Persistence of Output Fluctuations: The Case of Austria, No. 60, 
October 1998.   
Grandner T., Market Shares of Price Setting Firms and Trade Unions, No. 61, October 1998. 
Bellak Ch., Explaining Foreign Ownership by Comparative and Competitive Advantage: Empirical Evidence, No. 
62, March 1999.  
Klausinger H., The Stability of Full Employment. A Reconstruction of Chapter 19-Keynesianism, No. 63, April 
1999. 
Katzmair H., Der Modellbegriff in den Sozialwissenschaften. Zum Programm einer kritischen Sozio-Logik, No. 64, 
June 1999. 
Rumler F., Computable General Equilibrium Modeling, Numerical Simulations in a 2-Country Monetary General 
Equilibrium Model, No. 65, June 1999. 
Zagler M., Endogenous Growth, Efficiency Wages and Persistent Unemployment, No. 66, September 1999. 
Stockhammer E., Robinsonian and Kaleckian Growth. An Update on Post-Keynesian Growth Theories, No. 67, 
October 1999. 
Stockhammer E., Explaining European Unemployment: Testing the NAIRU Theory and a Keynesian Approach, 
No. 68, February 2000. 
Klausinger H., Walras’s Law and the IS-LM Model. A Tale of Progress and Regress, No. 69, May 2000. 
Grandner T., A Note on Unionized Firms’ Incentive to Integrate Vertically, No. 70, May 2000. 
Grandner T., Optimal Contracts for Vertically Connected, Unionized Duopolies,  No. 71, July 2000. 
Heise, A., Postkeynesianische Beschäftigungstheorie, Einige prinzipielle Überlegungen, No. 72, August 2000. 
Heise, A., Theorie optimaler Lohnräume, Zur Lohnpolitik in der Europäischen Währungsunion, No. 73, August 
2000. 
Unger B., Zagler M., Institutional and Organizational Determinants of Product Innovations. No. 74, August 2000. 
Bellak, Ch., The Investment Development Path of Austria, No. 75, November 2000. 
Heise, A., Das Konzept einer nachhaltige Finanzpolitik aus heterodoxer Sicht – ein Diskussionsbeitrag, No. 76, 
April 2001. 
Kocher M., Luptacik M., Sutter M., Measuring Productivity of Research in Economics. A Cross-Country Study 
Using DEA, No. 77, August 2001. 
Munduch, G., Pfister A., Sögner L., Stiassny A., Estimating Marginal Costs fort he Austrian Railway System, No. 
78, Februray  2002. 
Stückler M., Überprüfung von Gültigkeit und Annahmen der Friedman-These für Rohstoffmärkte, No. 79, July 
2002. 
Stückler M., Handel auf Terminkontraktmärkten, No. 80, July 2002. 
Ragacs Ch., Minimum Wages, Human Capital, Employment and Growth, No. 81, August 2002. 
 
  
 
Klausinger H., Walras’ Law in Stochastic Macro Models: The Example of the Optimal Monetary Instrument, No. 82, 
November 2002. 
Gstach D., A Statistical Framework for Estimating Output-Specific Efficiencies, No. 83, February 2003. 
Gstach D., Somers A., Warning S., Output specific efficiencies: The case of UK private secondary schools, No. 84, 
February 2003. 
Kubin I., The dynamics of wages and employment in a model of monopolistic competition and efficient bargaining, 
No. 85. May 2003. 
Bellak Ch., The Impact of Enlargement on the Race For FDI. No. 86 Jan. 2004 
Bellak Ch., How Domestic and Foreign Firms Differ and Why Does it Matter?. No. 87 Jan. 2004 
Grandner T., Gstach D., Joint Adjustment of house prices, stock prices and output towards short run equilibrium, 
No. 88. January 2004 
Currie M., Kubin I., Fixed Price Dynamics versus Flexible Price Dynamics, No. 89, January 2005 
Schönfeld S., Reinstaller A., The effects of gallery and artist reputation on prices in the primary market for art: A 
note, No. 90, May 2005 
Böheim, R. and Muehlberger, U., Dependent Forms of Self-employment in the UK: Identifying Workers on the 
Border between Employment and Self-employment. No. 91, Feb. 2006 
Hammerschmidt, A., A strategic investment game with endogenous absorptive capacity. No. 92, April 2006 
Onaran, Ö., Speculation-led growth and fragility in Turkey: Does EU make a difference or “can it happen again”? 
No. 93, May 2006 
Onaran, Ö., Stockhammer, E.,  The effect of FDI and foreign trade on wages in the Central and Eastern European 
Countries in the post-transition era: A sectoral analysis.  No. 94, June 2006 
Burger, A.,  Reasons for the U.S. growth period in the nineties: non-keynesian effects, asset wealth and 
productivity. No. 95, July 2006 
Stockhammer, E., Is the NAIRU theory a Monetarist, New Keynesian, Post Keynesian or a Marxist theory? No. 96, 
March 2006 
Onaran, Ö., Aydiner-Avsar, N., The controversy over employment policy: Low labor costs and openness, or 
demand policy? A sectoral analysis for Turkey. No. 97, August 2006 
Klausinger, H., Oskar Morgenstern als wirtschaftspolitischer Berater in den 1930er-Jahren. No. 98, July 2006 
Rocha-Akis, S., Labour tax policies and strategic offshoring under unionised oligopoly. No. 99, November 2006 
Stockhammer, E., Onaran, Ö., National and sectoral factors in wage formation in Central and Eastern Europe. No. 
100, December 2006 
Badinger, H., Kubin, I., Vom kurzfristigen zum mittelfristigen Gleichgewicht in einer offenen Volkswirtschaft unter 
fixen und flexiblen Wechselkursen. No. 101, January 2007 
Stockhammer, E., Onaran, Ö., Ederer, S., Functional income distribution and aggregate demand in the Euro-area. 
No. 102, February 2007 
Onaran, Ö., Jobless growth in the Central and Eastern European Countries: A country specific panel data analysis 
for the manufacturing industry. No. 103, March 2007 
Stockhammer, E., Ramskogler, P., Uncertainty and exploitation in history. No. 104, April 2007 
Ramskogler, P., Uncertainty, market power and credit rationing. No. 105, August 2007 
Stockhammer, E., Ederer, S., Demand effects of the falling wage share in Austria. No. 106, August 2007 
Steidl, A., Stockhammer, E., Coming and leaving. Internal mobility in late Imperial Austria. No. 107, August 2007. 
Onaran, Ö., International financial markets and fragility in the Eastern Europe: “can it happen” here? No. 108, 
September 2007. 
Grandner, T., Product differentiation in a linear city and wage bargaining. No 109, September 2007. 
Hein, E., Stockhammer, E., Macroeconomic policy mix, employment and inflation in a Post-Keynesian alternative 
to the New Consensus Model. No. 110, October 2007 
Commendatore, P., Kubin, I., Petraglia, C., Footloose capital and productive public services. No. 111, October 
2007 
Riedl, A., Rocha-Akis, S., Testing the tax competition theory: How elastic are national tax bases in western 
Europe? No. 112, November 2007 
Pufahl, A., Weiss, C., Evaluating the effects of farm programs: Results from propensity score. No. 113, November 
2007 
Stockhammer, E., Hein, E., Grafl, L. Globalization and the effects of changes in functional income distribution on 
aggregate demand in Germany. No. 114, December 2007 
Smet, K. Stuck in the middle? The structure of trade between South Africa and its major trading partners. No. 115, 
December 2007 
Fellner, G., Sutter, M. Causes, consequences, and cures of myopic loss aversion – An experimental investigation. 
No. 116, January 2008 
Riedl, A. Contrasting the dynamic patterns of manufacturing and service FDI: Evidence from transition economies. 
No. 117, January 2008 
 
  
 
Onaran, Ö., The effect of foreign affiliate employment on wages, employment, and the wage share in Austria. No. 
118, March 2008 
Onaran, Ö., The effect of import penetration on labor market outcomes in Austrian manufacturing industry. No. 
119, March 2008 
Hein, E., Shareholder value orientation, distribution and growth – short- and medium-run effects in a Kaleckian 
model. No. 120, March 2008 
Figerl, J., Grandner, T. Job quality and wages in duopsony. No. 121, June 2008 
Fellner, G., Lünser, G. K. Cooperation in local and global groups. No. 122, July 2008 
Stockhammer, E., Grafl, L. Financial uncertainty and business investment. No. 123, August 2008 
Stockhammer, E., Ramskogler, P. Post Keynesian economics – how to move forward. No. 124, December 2008 
Grafeneder-Weissteiner, T., Prettner, K. Agglomeration and population aging in a two region model of exogenous 
growth. No. 125, February 2009 
Onaran, Ö., Stockhammer, E., Grafl, L. The finance-dominated growth regime, distribution, and aggregate demand 
in the US. No. 126, February 2009 
Stockhammer, E. The finance-dominated accumulation regime, income distribution and the present crisis. No. 127, 
April 2009 
Leibrecht, M., Scharler, J. Banks, financial markets, and international consumption risk sharing. No. 128, May 
2009 
Fellner, W., Grishold, A. Positioning public service broadcasting in a competitive TV market: small country 
programming strategies based on a wide-reach genre. No. 129, July 2009 
Ramskogler, P. The state of wage convergence in the European Monetary Union. No. 130, January 2010 
Grafeneder-Weissteiner, T., Prettner, K. Agglomeration processes in aging societies. No. 131, June 2010 
Grafeneder-Weissteiner, T. Demographic change, growth and agglomeration. No. 132, June 2010 
Fellner, G., Iida, Y., Kröger, S., Seki, E. Heterogeneous productivity in voluntary public good provision – an 
experimental analysis. No. 133, July 2010 
Hagemann, H. L. Albert Hahn’s economic theory of bank credit. No. 134, December 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

