  
 
 
International Trade and Firm Performance: 
A Survey of Empirical Studies since 2006 
University of Lüneburg 
Working Paper Series in Economics  
 
No. 210 
 
August 2011 
 
www.leuphana.de/institute/ivwl/publikationen/working-papers.html 
 
ISSN 1860 - 5508 
 
by 
Joachim Wagner 
 
1 
 
International Trade and Firm Performance:  
A Survey of Empirical Studies since 2006* 
Joachim Wagner 
Leuphana University Lueneburg and IZA, Bonn 
[This version: August 4, 2011] 
Abstract: 
The literature on international trade and firm performance grows exponentially. This 
paper attempts to summarize what we learn from this literature to guide both future 
empirical and theoretical work in this area, and public debates and policy makers, in 
an evidence-based way. The focus is on the empirical part of the literature that 
consists of recently published papers using data for firms from manufacturing or 
services industries to study the links between international trade (exports and 
imports) and dimensions of firm performance (productivity, wages, profitability and 
survival). It discusses recent add-ons to the box of tools for empirical investigation in 
this field and suggests topics for future research. 
 
JEL classification: F14 
Keywords: International trade, firm performance, empirical studies, survey 
 
 
* I thank my co‐authors of contributions to this literature from the past six years – Nils Braakmann, 
Helmut  Fryges,  Sourafel  Girma,  Holger  Görg,  David  Powell,  Horst  Raff,  Thorsten  Schank,  Claus 
Schnabel, Yama Temouri, Vincenzo Verardi, Alexander Vogel and all members of  the  International 
Study Group on Exports and Productivity (ISGEP) ‐ for many  insightful discussions and a  lot of  ideas 
that made the preparation of this  literature survey possible. Evidently, none of them  is responsible 
for my summary and interpretation of the literature presented here. 
 
 
 
Prof. Dr. Joachim Wagner 
Leuphana University Lueneburg 
Institute of Economics 
P.O. Box 2440 
D‐21314 Lueneburg, Germany 
 
e‐mail: wagner@leuphana.de 
www:  http://www.leuphana.de/joachim‐wagner.html 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
During the recent past the literature on international firm activities and firm 
performance grew exponentially. This holds both for the empirical part made of 
micro-econometric studies, kicked-off by the Brookings Paper by Bernard and Jensen 
(1995), that investigate the mutual links between firm characteristics and international 
activities and for the theoretical part, started by the Econometrica paper by Melitz 
(2003),  that deals with international activities of heterogeneous firms. Many topics 
discussed in this literature are not only relevant for academic discussions but for 
public debates, too, and they rank high on the agenda of policy makers – 
“globalization” is one of today’s buzzwords, and its causes and consequences are 
important for developments at the individual, regional, national and international 
level. Therefore, it seems to be useful to look for results from the hundreds of papers 
that can guide both future empirical and theoretical work in this area, and public 
debates and policy makers, in an evidence-based way. 
Any attempt to summarize what we learn from this literature, however, has to 
be selective and has to focus on a subset of topics to keep the project tractable. Due 
to my own comparative advantage regarding the depth of knowledge of various 
aspects of the literature this survey 
- focuses on the empirical part of that literature and does not deal with 
theoretical models,1 
- looks at studies using micro data at the level of the firm (establishment or 
enterprise) only and does not deal with studies that use aggregate data at the 
industry or country level,2  
                                                            
1 Redding (2010) is a review of the recent theoretical literature on heterogeneous firms and trade. 
3 
 
- covers only more recent papers published since 20063 from the economics 
literature,4 
- and has a focus on international trade.5 
That said, the survey is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews recent studies 
on international trade and productivity. It starts with the old core topic of the literature, 
the relation between exports and productivity in manufacturing firms, in section 2.1 
and turns to a more recent topic, imports and productivity, afterwards in section 2.2. 
Next, it looks beyond manufacturing and asks in section 2.3 whether services firms 
are different. The discussion of findings related to productivity ends with looking 
beyond international trade, summarizing findings on the productivity pecking order 
among exporters, firms with foreign direct investments and firms that serve the 
national market only in section 2.4. Section 3 looks beyond productivity and reviews 
findings on international trade and further dimensions of firm performance, i.e. wages 
(section 3.1), profits (section 3.2) and firm survival (section 3.3). Section 4 concludes 
with suggestions for further research. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
2 Singh (2010) is a comprehensive survey of studies on the effects of international trade on 
productivity and economic growth based on macro data. 
3 The earlier literature is surveyed in Greenaway and Kneller (2007) and Wagner (2007a). 
4 For a survey and meta-analysis of studies on the relation between internationalization and firm 
performance from the international management literature see Bausch et al. (2007) and Bausch and 
Krist (2007). 
5 See Hayakawa et al. (2011) for a review of the literature on foreign direct investment and 
productivity. For inward foreign direct investment and a survey of empirical studies on productivity 
differentials between foreign owned firms and domestic firms see Barba Navaretti and Venables 
(2004, p. 155 – 162); for offshoring and productivity see Wagner (2011a). 
 
4 
 
2. New evidence on international trade and productivity 
Productivity – the efficiency with which firms turn inputs (labor, physical capital, 
energy, materials, managerial know-how) into outputs (goods, services) – is 
important for the competitiveness of firms, regions and countries on local, national 
and international markets. Productivity is an important driver of growth and welfare. 
Therefore, the study of productivity has been a core topic in economics for a long 
time. Empirical studies that use firm-level micro data to investigate the determinants 
and consequences of productivity differentials between firms, however, are of a more 
recent vintage. A case in point is the literature dealing with the links between 
productivity and international firm activities. This literature started with a Brookings 
paper by Bernard and Jensen (1995) that documents a positive exporter productivity 
premium in US manufacturing industries – exporters are more productive that non-
exporting firms of the same size from the same narrowly defined industry. This paper 
started a literature. Afterwards economists all over the world used firm-level micro 
data to investigate productivity differences between exporting and non-exporting 
firms and the direction of causality between export activity and firm-level productivity 
(see Wagner (2007a) for a survey). This literature on the micro-econometrics of 
international trade inspired theorists to develop what is now labeled the new new 
trade theory where heterogeneous firms that differ in productivity are at the heart of 
the theoretical models (see the canonical model by Melitz (2003) and the recent 
survey by Redding (2010)).   
 
 
 
 
5 
 
2.1 New evidence on exports and productivity in manufacturing industries 
2.1.1 Perceived knowledge and an update 
The extent and cause of productivity differentials between exporters and their 
counterparts which sell on the domestic market only is one of the core topics in the 
literature on international trade and firm performance. There are two alternative but 
not mutually exclusive hypotheses why exporters can be expected to be more 
productive than non-exporting firms (see Bernard and Jensen 1999; Bernard and 
Wagner 1997). The first hypothesis points to self-selection of the more productive 
firms into export markets. The reason for this is that there exist additional costs of 
selling goods in foreign countries. The range of extra costs include transportation 
costs, distribution or marketing costs, personnel with skill to manage foreign 
networks, or production costs in modifying current domestic products for foreign 
consumption. These costs provide an entry barrier that less successful firms cannot 
overcome. Furthermore, the behaviour of firms might be forward-looking in the sense 
that the desire to export tomorrow leads a firm to improve performance today to be 
competitive on the foreign market, too. Cross-section differences between exporters 
and non-exporters, therefore, may in part be explained by ex ante differences 
between firms: The more productive firms become exporters.  
The second hypothesis points to the role of learning-by-exporting. Knowledge 
flows from international buyers and competitors help to improve the post-entry 
performance of export starters. Furthermore, firms participating in international 
markets are exposed to more intense competition and must improve faster than firms 
who sell their products domestically only. Exporting makes firms more productive. 
The now standard approach to investigate differences in productivity between 
exporters and non-exporters is to follow (sometimes only in part, and sometimes with 
6 
 
modifications and extensions) the methodology introduced by Bernard and Jensen 
(1995, 1999). Studies of this type use longitudinal data for firms (usually from the 
regular surveys conducted by official statistics) to document differences in levels and 
growth rates of productivity between exporters and non-exporters in a first step. Here 
one starts by looking at differences in average labour productivity (total value of 
shipments per worker, or value added per worker) or average total factor productivity 
between exporters and non-exporters. The result is an unconditional productivity 
differential. 
The next step is the computation of so-called exporter premia, defined as the 
ceteris paribus percentage difference of labour productivity between exporters and 
non-exporters. These premia are computed from a regression of log productivity on 
the current export status dummy and a set of control variables (usually including 
industry, region, firm size measured by the number of employees, and year). The 
exporter premium shows the average percentage difference between exporters and 
non-exporters. 
To shed light on the empirical validity of the first hypothesis mentioned – 
namely, that the more productive firms go abroad – the pre-entry differences in 
productivity between export starters and non-exporters are investigated next. If good 
firms become exporters then we should expect to find significant differences in 
performance measures between future export starters and future non-starters several 
years before some of them begin to export.  
To test the second hypothesis mentioned – namely, that exporting fosters 
productivity - the post-entry differences in productivity growth between export starters 
and non-exporters are investigated. In doing so the self-selection of more productive 
firms into exporting is often controlled for by using matched firms from the groups of 
7 
 
export starters and non-starters that were identical in all (observed) characteristics in 
the year before some of these firms started to export. Starting to export is considered 
as a treatment that some firms received and other firms not; performance differences 
between the treated export starters and their twins from the group of the non-treated 
non-exporters are then interpreted as a causal effect of exports on productivity 
growth (see Wagner 2002). 
Wagner (2007a) gives a synopsis of findings from 54 empirical studies 
published between 1995 and 2006 that use firm-level data from 34 countries and that 
investigate the relationship of exports and productivity. Among the countries covered 
are highly industrialised countries, countries from Latin America and Asian countries, 
transition economies and least developed countries. Given this wide range of 
countries the big picture is amazingly clear-cut: With only a few exceptions exporters 
are found to have higher productivity, and often higher productivity growth, and this 
tends to hold after controlling for observed plant characteristics (like industry and 
size), too. Exporters are better. 
The findings for pre-entry differences often present evidence in favour of the 
self-selection hypothesis: Future export starters tend to be more productive than 
future non-exporters years before they enter the export market, and often have 
higher ex-ante growth rates of productivity. The good firms go abroad. 
Evidence regarding the learning-by-exporting hypothesis is somewhat more 
mixed: Results for post-entry differences in performance between export starters and 
non-exporters point to faster productivity growth for the former group in some studies 
only. Exporting does not necessarily improve firms. 
Does the big picture sketched here based on studies published until 2006 still 
describe the state of our knowledge in 2011? While it was possible to prepare a 
8 
 
comprehensive synopsis of empirical studies in this field in 2007 this is no longer the 
case today – there are now several hundred studies a summary of which would fill a 
(boring to read) book. The recent survey by Singh (2010) includes some of the 
papers published between 2006 and 2008. He concludes that “studies supporting the 
self-selection hypothesis numerically overwhelm the studies supporting the learning-
by-exporting hypothesis, and this implicitly provides a stronger support for the effects 
of productivity and growth on trade as compared to the effects of trade on productivity 
and growth” (Singh 2010:1537).  
The overall results from the study by the International Study Group on Exports 
and Productivity (2008) that uses comparable micro level panel data for 14 countries 
to look at the relationships between exports and productivity using identically 
specified empirical models are in line with this big picture. However, the authors point 
out that the paucity of evidence on learning-by-exporting found in this study should 
be qualified, as it might be dependent on the specific methodology utilized. De 
Loecker (2010) recently showed that current methods that are used to test for 
learning by exporting are biased towards rejecting the hypothesis of positive effects 
of exports on productivity. He provides evidence for this in the case of Slovenia. 
Comparable empirical results for other countries, however, are to the best of my 
knowledge not available.6 
The average exporter premium estimated in the study by the International 
Study Group on Exports and Productivity (2008) for the 14 countries, after controlling 
for fixed effects, is 7 percent. This premium varies substantially across countries. The 
                                                            
6 Silva et al. (2010) provide a detailed survey of the learning-by-exporting literature. They argue that so 
far no final consensus has been reached on the best way to test the hypothesis of learning-by-
exporting. For a meta-analysis of 33 empirical studies reporting almost 300 estimates see Martins and 
Yang (2009). 
9 
 
large number of countries and the high degree of comparability of results allow the 
authors to address a central question not investigated before: what country 
characteristics help explain the differences in exporter premia across countries? In a 
meta-analysis they build on gravity models of international trade, as well as on recent 
theories of trade with heterogeneous firms, to explore the relationship between a set 
of country characteristics and the cross-country variation in exporters’ premia. 
Consistent with theoretical predictions, they report that on average productivity 
premia are larger for countries with lower export participation rates, with more 
restrictive trade policies, lower per capita GDP, less effective government and worse 
regulatory quality, and for countries exporting to relatively more distant markets. 
 
2.1.2 A new topic: Export destination and productivity in manufacturing firms 
According to findings from the literature on exports and productivity (discussed 
above) an important reason for the positive productivity differential between exporters 
and non-exporters is self-selection of more productive plants on export markets. 
Furthermore, there is evidence for a market driven selection process in which 
exporters that have low productivity fail as a successful exporter, while only those 
that are more productive continue to export (Wagner 2007b, 2008).  
The reason for this is that there exist additional costs of selling goods in 
foreign countries. The range of extra costs include transportation costs, distribution or 
marketing costs, personnel with skill to manage foreign networks, or production costs 
in modifying current domestic products for foreign consumption. This implies that 
plants that export to a larger number of foreign markets have to be more productive 
than plants that serve a smaller number of foreign markets only, because at least 
some of the extra costs mentioned recur for each market (e.g., preparing a user’s 
10 
 
manual in another language, or checking the relevant national laws). Lawless (2009) 
presents a simple theoretical model that builds on the seminal contributions by Melitz 
(2003) and Chaney (2008) and that has this testable prediction. Furthermore, it 
seems plausible to assume that the larger the number of markets the higher will be 
(at least, on average) the distance related costs of exporting an exporter has to bear 
and that market entry costs differ across markets. 
Only recently empirical studies started to look at exports by a firm broken 
down by destination regions or countries – an approach that is not feasible for all 
countries of origin of exports due to data limitations. These studies apply the 
standard approach (outlined above) used in empirical studies on the exporter 
productivity premium when investigating the relationship between exports and 
productivity by destination country or region. They reveal new insights and shed light 
on hitherto not known facts. 
Table 1 summarizes7 25 micro-econometric studies on export destination and 
productivity for 11 different countries, most of which are highly industrialized western 
countries. These studies are mostly of a recent vintage – only two were published 
before 2006 and many papers are still in a working paper state. 
 
[Table 1 near here] 
 
                                                            
7 In this (and in all other tables in this literature survey) important results from empirical studies are 
summarized qualitatively only. Any attempt to reproduce the quantitative results by stating the size of 
the estimated coefficients and effects would suggest a high degree of comparability across the 
studies. This, however, is not given due to differences in the unit of analysis (establishment vs. 
enterprise), the sampling frame (all firms versus firm with a number of employees above a certain 
threshold only), the specification of the empirical models estimated and the econometric methods 
applied. This point is discussed in the concluding section 4 below. 
11 
 
While 5 studies use cross-section data only, 20 are based on panel data that 
allow to control for unobserved heterogeneity via fixed effects and that offer the 
opportunity to look at the direction of the relationship between productivity and 
destination of exports by testing for the presence of ex-ante differences (that existed 
before exporting to a destination started) and positive effects of exporting to a 
destination on firm performance (learning-by-exporting to a destination). 
Although results are not strictly comparable between the studies due to 
differences in, among others, the number and type of destinations looked at (e.g., EU 
vs. non-EU; areas defined according to per-capita income; or a large number of 
destination countries), the definition of the sample used (establishments or 
enterprises; cut-off point of number of employees), the period under investigation, 
and the statistical methods applied, a big picture emerges that can be sketched as 
follows: 
 (1) The number of export markets served increases with productivity 
(Belgium – Muuls and Pisu (2009); Germany – Wagner (2007), Vincenzo and 
Wagner (2010); Ireland – Ruane and Sutherland (2005), Lawless (2009); Italy - 
Castellani, Serti and Tomasi (2010), Conti, Turco and Maggioni (2010); Japan – 
Wakasugi and Tanaka (2009); Slovenia – Damijan, Polanec and Prasnikar (2004), 
De Loecker (2007); Spain – Blanes-Cristobal, Dovis, Milgram-Baleix and Moro-Egido 
(2007), Mánez-Castillejo, Rochina-Barrachina and Sanchis-Llopis (2010); Sweden – 
Andersson, Lööf and Johansson (2008), Eliasson, Hansson and Lindvert (2009)). 
(2) Exporters to more developed economies have superior ex-ante 
productivity levels than non-exporters and firms exporting to less developed countries 
(Belgium – Pisu (2008); Italy – Serti and Tomasi (2009); Slovenia -  Damijan, Polanec 
and Prasnikar (2004), Damijan and Kostevc (2006), De Loecker (2007), Kostevc 
12 
 
(2008); Portugal – Silva, Afonso and Africano (2010a); Russia – Wilhelmsson and 
Kozlov (2007); Spain - Blanes-Cristobal, Dovis, Milgram-Baleix and Moro-Egido 
(2007)). 
(3) Evidence for different causal effects of exporting on productivity by 
destination of exports is  rare and not conclusive (Belgium – Pisu (2008) reports no 
causal effect irrespective of development level of destination countries; Japan – 
Yashiro and Hirano (2009) find only exporters serving worldwide enjoyed significant 
advantage in productivity growth;  Portugal – Silva, Afonso and Africano (2010b) 
report no learning effects for firms that export to non-developed countries only but 
fast effects for exporters only to EU countries; Russia – Wilhelmsson and Kozlov 
(2007) find inconclusive evidence for learning-by.-exporting; Slovenia - Damijan, 
Polanec and Prasnikar (2004), state that exporters can benefit from exporting 
through learning and competition effects only when serving more demanding 
advanced markets; De Loecker (2007) finds that firms exporting only to low income 
regions get additional productivity gains that are lower than in firms exporting to high 
income countries; and Kostevc (2008), states that evidence of the learning process is 
not conclusive). 
What can we learn from the micro-econometric studies surveyed here about 
the relationship between export destinations and productivity? Even if the evidence 
we have so far might not qualify as a stylized fact due to restrictions in the 
comparability of the studies it seems fair to state that we know that the number of 
export destinations is positively related to productivity and that we have evidence for 
self-selection of more productive firms into more demanding markets while the jury is 
still out regarding the issue of different learning-by-exporting effects by different 
export destinations. 
13 
 
2.1.3 New approaches to the empirical analysis of the exporter productivity 
premium 
The standard approach in empirical studies of the exporter productivity premium that 
is outlined above uses OLS regression (with or without fixed firm effects to control for 
time invariant unobserved heterogeneity) to identify productivity differences between 
exporters and non-exporters at a point in time (including tests for self-selection of 
more productive firms into exporting) and OLS regression plus propensity score 
matching methods to test for causal effects of starting to export on productivity 
growth (testing for learning-by-exporting). Several studies step beyond a comparison 
of (unconditional or conditional) mean values of productivity between exporters and 
non-exporters and apply the non-parametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for differences 
in the whole unconditional productivity distribution between groups of firms that has 
been introduced to the literature on exports and productivity by Delgado, Farinas and 
Ruano (2002) and quantile regression for an evaluation of the size of the exporter 
premium at different points of the conditional productivity distribution (see Wagner 
(2010a) for a summary of these studies and illustrative examples with German data).  
In recent research it is demonstrated that these “traditional” methods do not 
deal with firm heterogeneity in an adequate way when it comes to the study of 
exports and productivity and more appropriate methods are suggested. These new 
approaches that are reviewed in this section deal with three topics, namely firms with 
extreme observations (outliers), different productivity premia over the productivity 
distribution when unobserved heterogeneity matters and causal effects of exporting 
for different shares of export in total sales (on not only of exporting or not). 
 
 
14 
 
Extremely different firms (outliers) 
In a sample of heterogeneous firms often values for some variables for some firms 
are far away from the other observations in the sample. For example, in a sample of 
exporting and non-exporting firms one usually has a few firms with labour productivity 
values that are extremely low or extremely high compared to the mean values. These 
extreme values might be the result of reporting errors (and, therefore, wrong), or due 
to idiosyncratic events (like in the case of a shipyard that produces a ship over a long 
time and that reports the sales in the year when the ship is completed and delivered), 
or due to firm behavior that is vastly different from the behavior of the majority of 
firms in the sample. Observations of this kind are termed outliers. Whatever the 
reason may be, extreme values of labour productivity may have a large influence on 
the mean value of labour productivity computed for the exporters and non-exporters 
in the sample, on the tails of the distribution of labour productivity, and on the 
estimates of the exporter premium. Conclusions with regard to the productivity 
differences between exporters and non-exporters, therefore, might be influenced by a 
small number of firms with extremely high or low values of productivity, and the same 
is true for any other empirical investigation using data for a sample of heterogeneous 
firms. 
Researchers from the field of micro-economics of international firm activities 
usually are aware of all of this. Given that due to confidentiality of the firm level data 
single observations as a rule cannot be inspected closely enough to detect and 
correct reporting errors, or to understand the idiosyncratic events that lead to extreme 
values, a widely used procedure to keep these extreme observations from shaping 
the results is to drop the observations from the top and bottom one percent of the 
distribution of the variable under investigation. A case in point is the international 
15 
 
comparison study on the exporter productivity premium by the International Study 
Group on Exports and Productivity (ISGEP) (2008: 610). 
Dropping the firms from the top and the bottom one percent of the productivity 
distribution and comparing the results of empirical investigations with and without 
these firms with extremely high or extremely low values of labour productivity might 
be considered as a first and useful step to check the sensitivity of results. However, 
although this approach seems to be rather popular it is in some sense arbitrary. Why 
the top and bottom one percent? Why not choose a larger or smaller cut-off point? 
There are alternative approaches to deal with extreme observations (outliers) that are 
substantiated in statistics.8 
Wagner (2010a) reports results for the exporter premium computed for a 
cross-section sample of 618 German manufacturing firms using OLS and various 
methods that are designed to deal with outliers (Least Absolute Deviations (LAD) 
regression, Huber M-estimator, fully robust MM-estimator). The estimated labour 
productivity premium is statistically highly significant and large from an economic 
point of view for all estimators applied. The estimated size, however, differs 
considerably. The estimated premium from the fully robust MM-estimator is 
considerably lower than the values from both OLS and LAD applied to the full or the 
trimmed sample without the firms from the top/bottom one percent of the productivity 
distribution. This illustrates that it is important to document the extent to which 
estimation results are influenced by extreme observations.  
                                                            
8 A discussion of these methods is beyond the scope of this paper; see Verardi and Croux (2009) for 
an introduction with a view on applications (plus Stata code) and for references to the theoretical 
literature. 
16 
 
Thus far the consequences of observed firm heterogeneity for micro-
econometric studies of international firm activities are considered. Firm 
heterogeneity, however, might be caused by factors that are either not observed by 
the researcher and that, therefore, are not included in the empirical model, or that are 
unobservable to a researcher. A case in point with regard to the exporter productivity 
premium is management quality. In the data sets used to empirically investigate 
international firm activities variables that measure management quality are missing. 
This would not pose a big problem if management quality would be uncorrelated with 
the other variables included in the empirical model (e.g., the exporter status) – of 
course it would not be possible to investigate the role of management quality for 
productivity differences between firms empirically, but the estimated coefficient for 
the exporter dummy variable would be an unbiased estimate of the exporter 
productivity premium (given all other assumptions for the applicability of OLS are 
fulfilled).  However, one would not expect that management quality is uncorrelated 
with either the exporter status or other variables like firm size. Not controlling for 
management quality then leads to biased estimates for the exporter premium. 
A standard solution for this problem that is widely used in the literature on the 
micro-econometrics of international firm activities is the estimation of fixed effects 
models for panel data. Using pooled cross-section time-series data for firms and 
including fixed firm effects in the empirical model allows to control for time invariant 
unobserved firm heterogeneity, and to estimate the coefficients for the time variant 
variables that are included in the models without any bias caused by the non-
inclusion of the unobserved variables that are correlated with these included 
variables. A case in point is the paper by ISGEP (2008), were in table 4 exporter 
productivity premia are reported based on empirical models with and without fixed 
17 
 
effects. If fixed firm effects are added to control for time invariant unobserved 
heterogeneity the point estimates of the exporter productivity premia are much 
smaller compared to the results based on pooled data only.  
Thus, unobserved firm heterogeneity does matter. Is it possible to tackle both 
aspects of firm heterogeneity - outliers and unobserved heterogeneity - 
simultaneously? A highly robust MM-estimator for panel data with fixed effects has 
been proposed recently by Bramati and Croux (2007). While a discussion of details of 
this estimator is beyond the scope of this paper the underlying idea is to center the 
series of observations for a firm in a similar way to what is generally done when 
applying the within transformation that is used to estimate a fixed effects model. The 
difference here is that the series are centered by removing the median instead of 
demeaning because the mean is largely distorted by outliers. Having centered the 
series, a robust estimator can be applied to deal with atypical individuals. The 
outcoming results will be comparable to those of a fixed effects estimator but will not 
be distorted by the presence of atypical individuals. 
Verardi and Wagner (2011) apply this newly developed method to the 
estimation of exporter productivity premia for firms from manufacturing industries in 
West Germany and compare the results to those from using the standard fixed 
effects estimator. 3.07 percent of the enterprises are identified to be outliers. 
Dropping these outliers leads to a drastic change in the estimation results for the 
exporter productivity premium and to a dramatic change in the conclusions drawn: 
While the estimated exporter premium is statistically highly significant and large from 
an economic point of view, taking on a value of 13.43 percent, this estimate (while 
still statistically highly significant) drops to 0.997 percent when the same model is 
estimated using the robust fixed effects method. According to the results from the 
18 
 
robust fixed effects regression there is no such thing as a large exporter productivity 
premium!  
This demonstrates that outliers can drive results from an empirical study with 
heterogeneous firms. Verardi and Wagner (2010) report similar results in a study on 
the exporter premia by destination of exports (euro-zone vs. non-euro zone). 
Furthermore, Verardi and Wagner (2011) show in a Monte Carlo study that the 
standard procedure of trimming the data by deleting the observations from the 
top/bottom one percent of the productivity distribution leads to biased estimations. 
Therefore, the newly available method of robust estimation of linear fixed effects 
models should be considered as a valuable add-on to the box of tools for empirically 
analyzing international activities of heterogeneous firms. 
 
Exporter premia along the productivity distribution 
As stated above in the literature on exports and productivity quantile regression 
(described in detail in Koenker (2005)) has been used for an evaluation of the size of 
the exporter premium at different points of the conditional productivity distribution. 
Until recently it was not feasible to control for unobserved heterogeneity via fixed firm 
effects in a quantile regression. Powell and Wagner (2011) apply a newly developed 
method for quantile regression for panel data developed by Powell (2009) to estimate 
the exporter productivity premium at quantiles of the productivity distribution for 
manufacturing enterprises in Germany.  
In West Germany the productivity premium of exporters over non-exporters is 
statistically different from zero at each quantile of the productivity distribution, and 
this holds for East Germany, too, with the exception of the very high end. While the 
premium tends to be small (but not negligible) over large parts of the distribution from 
19 
 
the 30th percentile onwards where it is about 5 percent, it is much larger at the lower 
end. For the 5th percentile the estimate in favor of the exporters is 29.0 percent in 
West Germany and 33.1 percent in East Germany, and the corresponding figure at 
the 10th percentile is 15.6 percent in both parts of Germany. 
Powell and Wagner (2011) argue that the finding that the exporter productivity 
premium is positive, statistically significant and of an order of magnitude that is 
relevant from an economic point of view all over the productivity distribution is 
important because it shows that the central policy implication of the Melitz (2003) 
model is still valid here with the presence of low productivity exporters and high 
productivity non-exporters: a reduction in trade barriers leads to an increase in 
productivity.  They note that the estimates of the exporter premia decrease 
substantially when fixed effects are included, suggesting that existing estimates in the 
literature are biased due to unobserved firm heterogeneity.  However, the pattern of 
the results survives – the effect is largest at the bottom of the productivity distribution. 
These interesting and important new insights demonstrate that the newly 
available method for quantile regression in a linear fixed effects models should be 
considered as another valuable add-on to the box of tools for empirically analyzing 
international activities of heterogeneous firms. 
 
The causal effect of exports on productivity reconsidered: A continuous 
treatment approach 
Previous empirical studies (reviewed above) show that exporting does not 
necessarily improve productivity. One possible reason for this result is that most 
previous studies are restricted to analyzing the relationship between a firm’s export 
status and the growth of its labour productivity, using the firms’ export status as a 
20 
 
binary treatment variable and comparing the performance of exporting and non-
exporting firms. In two papers Fryges (2009) and Fryges and Wagner (2008) apply 
the newly developed generalised propensity score (GPS) methodology by Hirano and 
Imbens (2004)  that allows for continuous treatment, that is, different levels of the 
firms’ export activities. 
Using the GPS method and a large panel data set for German manufacturing 
firms Fryges and Wagner (2008) estimate the relationship between a firm’s export-
sales ratio and its labour productivity growth rate. They find that there is a causal 
effect of firms’ export activities on labour productivity growth. However, exporting 
improves labour productivity growth only within a sub-interval of the range of firms’ 
export-sales ratios. Furthermore, they report that the relationship between labour 
productivity growth and the export-sales ratio is not stable over time. 
These are important findings that cannot be uncovered using the standard 
approach by applying propensity score matching and comparing export starters and 
observational identical non-starters over the years after the export start of some of 
them to compute the average treatment effect on the treated. This illustrates that the 
GPS method should be considered as a third valuable add-on to the box of tools for 
empirically analyzing international activities of heterogeneous firms besides the 
robust fixed effects estimator and the estimator for quantile regression with fixed firm 
effects. 
 
2.2 Imports and productivity in manufacturing firms 
While the causes and consequences of export and its mutual relationships with 
productivity are prominent topics in the recent literature on internationally active firms, 
imports are seldom dealt with. A case in point is the recently published Bruegel study 
21 
 
on the internationalisation of European firms (Mayer and Ottaviano 2007) where 
imports are not dealt with at all. As Bernard et al. (2007: 123) recently put it, “(t)he 
empirical literature on firms in international trade has been concerned almost 
exclusively with exporting, largely due to limitations in datasets … . As a result, the 
new theories of heterogeneous firms and trade were developed to explain facts about 
firm export behavior and yield few predictions (if any) for firm import behavior.”  
In the literature arguments for both a positive impact of productivity on 
importing (which is in accordance with self-selection of more productive firms into 
import markets) and for a positive impact of importing on productivity (‘learning-by-
importing’) are discussed.  
To start with the arguments in favour of self-selection of more productive firms 
into importing it is pointed out that the use of foreign intermediates increases a firm’s 
productivity but, due to fixed costs of importing, only inherently highly productive firms 
import intermediates. Importing is associated with fixed costs that are sunk costs, 
because the import agreement is preceded by a search process for potential foreign 
suppliers, inspection of goods, negotiation, contract formulation etc. Furthermore, 
there are sunk costs of importing due to the learning and acquisition of customs 
procedures (see Kasahara and Lapham (2008), Andersson et al. (2008), Castellani 
et al. (2010)). 
As regards learning-by-importing it is stated that there are strong arguments in 
favour of a causal effect of imports on productivity, because by importing a firm can 
exploit global specialization and use inputs from the forefront of knowledge and 
technology. Proponents of this view point to the literature on international technology 
diffusion that advances imports as an important vehicle for knowledge and 
technology transfer. Furthermore, importing intermediate products allows a firm to 
22 
 
focus resources and to specialize on activities where it has particular strengths. 
Importers may improve productivity by using higher quality foreign inputs or by 
extracting technology embodied in imported intermediates and capital goods. 
Furthermore a variety effect is mentioned (in which the broader range of available 
intermediates contributes to production efficiency) and a quality effect caused by 
imported intermediates that might be of better quality than local ones.  If importing 
increases productivity, this might lead firms to self-select into export markets and 
help to improve their success in these markets, which might contribute to an 
explanation why two-way traders are the most productive firms on average (see 
Andersson et al. (2008), Castellani et al. (2010), Altomonte and Békés (2010), 
Halpern et al. (2005) and Muuls and Pisu (2009)). 
From a theoretical point of view, therefore, the direction of causality between 
productivity and importing can run from one of the two sides or from both sides 
simultaneously. With new datasets that include information on imports at the firm 
level becoming available for more and more countries a new literature is emerging 
that has a focus on the links between productivity and imports. A number of recently 
published empirical studies based on data from a wide range of countries document 
the shares of firms that are exporters, importers, and two-way traders (that both 
export and import), or that sell or buy on the national market only, and they look at 
differences between these four types of firms. Differences in productivity and their 
relationship with different degrees of involvement in international trade are at the 
centre of these studies. Table 2 summarizes the findings from 20 micro-econometric 
studies on imports and productivity based on firm data from 12 countries. All papers 
are published since 2007 and many of them are still in working paper status. 
 
23 
 
[Table 2 near here] 
 
Details aside, the big picture that emerges from this literature can be sketched 
as follows: There is a positive link between importing and productivity at the firm 
level, documented by a significant productivity differential between firms that import 
and firms that do not trade internationally; the same holds for exporting.  Two-way 
traders are more productive than firms that either only import, or only export, or do 
not trade at all. Often, two-way traders are the most productive group of firms, 
followed by importers and then exporters, while firms selling or buying on the national 
market come last. We have evidence for self-selection of more productive firms into 
exporting from most of the studies that look at this issue; the evidence on learning-
by-importing, however, is still rare and inconclusive. 
 
2.3 Beyond manufacturing: International trade and productivity in services 
firms 
While we have evidence on the links between international trade and productivity in 
manufacturing firms from a large number of empirical studies published during the 
past 15 years comparable information for firms from services industries is scarce and 
of a recent vintage. Given the high and increasing importance of the services sector – 
Jorgenson and Timmer (2011, p. 1) state in their comprehensive analysis of 
structural change in advanced nations: “Since 1980, the services sector has 
overwhelmingly predominated in the economic activity of the European Union, Japan 
and the US …” – it is interesting to review the empirical evidence from studies using 
24 
 
micro-data on trade and productivity in services firms.9 Table 3 summarizes the 
findings from seven micro-econometric studies on trade and productivity based on 
services firm data from six countries. All papers are published in 2010 or 2011, and 
only Breinlich and Criscuolo (2011) look beyond exports by investigating imports, too.  
 
[Table 3 near here] 
 
The big picture is similar to the one sketched above for trade in manufactured 
goods. Exporters are more productive than non-exporters and we have evidence for 
self-selection of more productive firms into services exports but no evidence for 
learning-by-exporting effects on productivity growth. Note, however, that Vogel and 
Wagner (2011) find an estimated exporter productivity premium that is statistically 
significant and relevant from an economic point of view only when a standard fixed 
effects estimator is used. When a robust estimator (discussed in detail in section 
2.1.3 above) that takes care of the presence of extreme observations, or outliers, is 
applied, this premium drops to zero. At least for Germany, therefore, like in the case 
of manufacturing industries results are driven by a fraction of firms with extreme 
values in services, too. An important next step in research in this area consists in 
similar empirical investigations that use firm level panel data from services industries 
in other countries. 
 
 
                                                            
9 For a comprehensive survey of the literature on services trade with a focus on investigations of the 
determinants of international trade and investment in services, the potential gains from greater trade 
and efforts to achieve trade liberalization through agreements see Francois and Hoekman (2010). 
25 
 
2.4 Beyond trade: Outward foreign direct investment and productivity  
Besides international trade (exports and imports) other forms of international 
activities of firms and their relation with productivity are investigated both theoretically 
and empirically. Given the focus of this survey paper on international trade we will 
look at one of these activities only that is closely related to trade because firms may 
consider it as a substitute for exports – outward foreign direct investment in its 
horizontal variant, i.e. the creation of a production facility in a foreign country to 
produce products identical to or similar to the products produced in the home country. 
In a multi-country, multi-sector general equilibrium model of Helpman, Melitz 
and Yeaple (2004) investigate the decision of heterogeneous firms to serve foreign 
markets either trough exports or through foreign direct investment, i.e. by building 
new production facilities in a foreign county or by acquiring existing firms there. They 
show that, in equilibrium, only the more productive firms choose to serve the foreign 
markets, and the most productive among this group will further choose to serve these 
markets via foreign direct investment. The intuition behind this theoretical result is 
similar to the argument put forward in the case of exports and productivity. There 
exist additional costs of starting production activities in a foreign country, including 
costs to become familiar with all legal and economic aspects related to doing 
business abroad, and these costs can be expected to be even larger than the extra 
costs a firm that exports has to pay compared to a firm that sells its products on the 
national market only. Only the most productive firms can be expected to be able to 
pay these costs and to produce profitably in a foreign country. 
Several recent empirical papers take the Helpman-Melitz-Yeaple model as a 
point of departure. Table 4 summarizes the findings from 14 micro-econometric 
studies on the productivity pecking order among firms with different forms of 
26 
 
international activities. All but two of these studies use data for highly industrialized 
countries,10 and all but one look at firms from manufacturing industries only.11   
The big picture is well in line with the predictions derived from the theoretical 
model by Helpman, Meltiz and Yeaple (2004) – firms that serve the home market 
only are the less productive group, followed by firms that export and by firms that 
engage in outward foreign direct investment (usually these firms are exporters, too). 
 
[Table 4 near here] 
 
An interesting finding from the only study that looks at firms beyond 
manufacturing industries and that considers firms from software services in India is a 
reversed pecking order between exporters and firms with outward foreign direct 
investment in services compared to firms in manufacturing (here: from the chemicals 
industry) for the same country (India) and the same time period. Bhattacharya et al. 
(2010) report that less productive software companies engage in outward foreign 
direct investments. It would be important to have comparable empirical evidence from 
other studies based on firm level data from services industries to get an impression 
whether this is an anomaly or whether it points to fundamental differences in the way 
firms determine the form of international activities used.  
 
                                                            
10 The exceptions are Bhattacharya et al. (2010) for India and Damijan et al. (2007) for Slovenia; the 
sample used by Oberhofer and Pfaffermayr (2011) includes firms from Croatia, Cyprus, Greece and 
Slovenia, too. 
11 Bhattacharya et al. (2010) look at data from firms in the chemicals industry and in a services 
industry, software development. 
27 
 
3. Beyond productivity: International trade and further dimensions of firm 
performance 
The prominent position of productivity as a topic in the empirical literature on 
international trade and firm performance is due to the central role played by 
productivity in the Melitz-type models from the new new international trade theory. 
Stakeholders in firms care for other dimensions of firm performance, too – workers 
for working conditions in general and especially for wages, shareholders for stock 
prices, dividends and  profits, and all of them for the longer-run development of the 
firm including survival as an ultimate goal. Empirical evidence on the links between 
international trade and further dimensions of firm performance beyond productivity 
will be surveyed next, starting with wages (in section 3.1) and profitability (in section 
3.2) and concluding with survival (in section 3.3). 
 
3.1 International trade and wages 
One of the new and exciting findings documented in the Brookings paper by Bernard 
and Jensen (1995) is that exporters tend to pay higher wages and benefits. Average 
wages and benefits (per worker, per production worker, and per non-production 
worker) are higher in exporting plants than in non-exporting plants of all size classes. 
Exporter wage premia are statistically significant for all categories of wages and 
benefits after controlling for capital per worker, size of plant, multi-plant dummy, 
industry, year, plant age, and region. Coefficients of exporter status dummies are 
statistically significant in fixed effects regressions controlling for capital per worker, 
hours per worker, size of plant, and year. Schank et al. (2007) provide a synopsis of 
21 studies published between 1995 and 2005 covering 22 different countries from 
highly developed economies like the U.S., Germany, and Sweden, and emerging 
28 
 
economies like Taiwan, Korea, and Mexico, to transition countries (Estonia, Slovenia) 
and least developed Sub-Saharan African economies like Burundi or Ethiopia.  The 
empirical strategies used in these papers replicate (sometimes only partly) the 
approach introduced by Bernard and Jensen, and the results regarding the exporter 
wage premia are broadly consistent with the findings from the pioneering study. 
An open question not dealt with in this literature is whether these exporter 
wage premia do indeed indicate that exporting plants pay higher wages in the sense 
that comparable workers are better paid when working on a comparable work place 
for an exporter, i.e. ceteris paribus. Given that all these empirical studies use average 
data at the plant or firm level, individual characteristics of the workers that might 
influence their productivity (and, therefore, their wages) cannot be taken into account, 
and certain characteristics of the work place that might call for compensating wage 
differentials are not represented adequately. This shortcoming has been recognized 
from the outset: Commenting on the presentation of the paper by Bernard and 
Jensen, Robert Z. Lawrence argued that “the impact of exports, while positive and 
statistically significant, is considerably reduced once the effects of capital intensity, 
industry, plant scale, and location are controlled for. One suspects, moreover, that 
the premiums would be even further reduced if the authors were able to control for 
worker characteristics. Thus the wage benefits that are attributable solely to exporting 
appear to be rather small.” (Bernard and Jensen 1995: 113f.) 
Starting with the pioneering study by Schank et al. (2007) a number of recent 
empirical papers tests for the existence of these premia when observable and 
unobservable individual characteristics of the employees and the work place are 
controlled for using linked employer-employee panel data set. Furthermore, Schank 
et al. (2010) investigate the direction of causality of the exports-wages link by looking 
29 
 
for self-selection of firms that pay higher wages ceteris paribus into exporting and 
testing for a causal effect of exports on wages paid to employees in a firm. Table 5 
summarizes the findings from these recent studies.12 
 
[Table 5 near here] 
 
The number of these “second generation” studies on trade and wages based 
on linked employer-employee data is still small (and the number of countries covered 
is even smaller) and some studies only use cross-section data that do not allow to 
control for unobserved firm or worker heterogeneity. Therefore, a big picture has not 
emerged until day. One consensus, however, has been reached: Compared to the 
empirical evidence based on average information at the firm level the exporter wage 
premium is much smaller when (observed or unobserved) individual worker 
characteristics are controlled for; in some studies based on linked employer-
employee data  there is no such thing as a wage premium for exporting per se. This 
points out that the use of linked employer-employee panel data is much more 
appropriate to investigate the existence and the size of the exporter wage premium. 
Other findings vary between studies and some interesting aspects (like the 
role of imports, or destination markets, or skill categories; the existence or not of self-
selection and of causal effects of exporting on wages paid) are only dealt with in 
single studies. Internationally comparable studies are urgently needed here before 
results can be taken as a basis for any sound (policy) conclusions. 
                                                            
12 In table 5 only studies based on linked employer-employee panel data are included. Recent studies 
on the relation between trade and wages using average data at the firm level include Serti et al. (2010) 
for exports and imports in Italy; Tsou et al. (2006) for Taiwan; Kandilov (2009) for Chile; Brambilla et 
al. for Brazil; and Amiti and Davis (2008) for Indonesia. 
30 
 
3.2 Exports and profitability 
A huge literature (reviewed in section 2.1 above) demonstrates that exporting 
firms are more productive than otherwise identical firms that sell on the national 
market only. Exporting firms have to bear extra costs due to, among others, market 
research, adaptation of products to local regulations, or transport costs. These extra 
costs are one reason for a self-selection of the more productive firms on international 
markets. Furthermore, as seen in section 3.1 exporting firms tend to pay higher 
wages than non-exporting firms. A question that has been investigated in the 
literature on the micro-econometrics of international trade only recently is whether the 
productivity advantage of exporting firms does lead to a profitability advantage of 
exporters compared to otherwise identical non-exporters even when exporters are 
facing extra costs and pay higher wages.  
This apparent gap in the literature on the micro-econometrics of international 
trade comes as a surprise because maximization of profits (and not of productivity) is 
usually considered as a central goal for firms. Furthermore, looking at profitability 
instead of productivity is more appropriate from a theoretical point of view, too. Even 
if productivity and profitability are positively correlated (which tends to be the case) 
productivity is, as was recently pointed out by Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson 
(2008, p. 395), only one of several possible idiosyncratic factors that determine 
profits. Success of firms in general, and especially survival, depends on profitability. 
Often profitability is viewed both in theoretical models of market selection and in 
empirical studies on firm entry and exit as a positive monotonic function of 
productivity, and selection on profits then is equivalent to selection on productivity. In 
empirical studies the use of productivity instead of profitability is usually due to the 
fact that productivity is easily observed in the data sets at hand while profitability is 
31 
 
not. Fortunately, there are data sets that are rich enough to allow to measure 
profitability. Table 6 summarizes the findings from recent studies on trade and profits. 
 
[Table 6 near here] 
 
The number of studies on exports and profits is still small and the number of 
countries covered (all of which are member states of the EU) is even smaller. Results 
differ widely across the studies – from positive to no to negative profitability 
differences between exporters and non-exporters; from evidence for self-selection of 
more or less profitable firms into exporting to no evidence for self-selection at all; 
from no positive effects of exports on profits to positive effects. As of today, a big 
picture has not emerged. Open questions include the role played by different export 
destinations and by the characteristics of these export-markets, and the importance 
of the number and the quality of products exported, for the relationship between 
exports and profitability.  
Only one study listed in table 6 looks at imports and profitability. This paper by 
Wagner (2011b) documents for the first time the relationship between profitability and 
three types of international trade activities – exports, imports and two-way trade for 
manufacturing enterprises from Germany. Descriptive statistics and regression 
analysis (with and without controlling for unobserved firm heterogeneity and the role 
of outliers) point to the absence of any statistically significant and economically large 
effects of trade activities on profits. This demonstrates that in German manufacturing 
firms any productivity advantages of trading firms are eaten up by extra costs related 
to selling and buying on foreign markets. Whether this holds for firms from other 
countries, too, is an important topic for future research. 
32 
 
3.3 International trade and firm survival 
Why should we expect that international trade activities and firm survival are linked, 
and in which direction should we expect these links to work? Following Wagner 
(2011c), to start with, exporting can be considered as a form of risk diversification 
through spread of sales over different markets with different business cycle 
conditions or in a different phase of the product cycle. Therefore, exports might 
provide a chance to substitute sales at home by sales abroad when a negative 
demand shock hits the home market and would force a firm to close down otherwise. 
Furthermore, Baldwin and Yan (2011, p. 135) argue that non-exporters are in general 
less efficient than exporters (younger, smaller and less productive) and that, as a 
result, one expects that non-exporters are more likely to fail than exporters. 
As regards imports, imported intermediate inputs or capital goods might be 
cheaper and / or technically more advanced than inputs bought on the national 
market. Gibson and Graciano (2011) argue that the benefit of using imported inputs 
lies in a combination of the relative price and the technology embodied in the inputs. 
Imports, therefore, lead to an increase in price competitiveness and non-price 
competitiveness of importers compared to firms that do not import. Furthermore, 
there is empirical evidence for a positive link of imports and productivity (discussed in 
Vogel and Wagner 2010a), documented by a significant productivity differential 
between firms that import and firms that do not trade internationally. Therefore, the 
probability to survive can be expected to be higher for importers than for non-
importers, ceteris paribus. 
Firms that both export and import can be expected to benefit from the positive 
effects of both forms of international trade on firm survival. Furthermore, two-way 
traders tend to be more productive than firms that either only import, or only export, 
33 
 
or do not trade at all (see Vogel and Wagner 2010a). Therefore, we expect the 
probability of firm exit to be smaller for two-way traders than for firms that only export 
or only import. 
A small number of recent empirical studies look at the role of international 
trade activities in shaping the chances for survival of firms; Table 7 summarizes this 
literature.13 As a rule the estimated chance of survival is higher for exporters, and this 
holds after controlling for firm characteristics that are positively associated with both 
exports and survival (like size, age, productivity). This might point to a direct positive 
effect of exporting on survival.  
 
[Table 7 near here] 
 
López (2006), Gibson and Graciano (2011), Namini et al. (2011) and Wagner 
(2011c) are the only empirical studies on imports and survival. The first three studies 
use data for Chile. These studies find that importers are less likely to exit than non-
importers. However, López (2006) reports that exporters are more likely to survive 
only if they import intermediate inputs – exporting per se, therefore, does not seem to 
decrease the probability of plant failure. In the light of the empirical evidence for a 
positive link of imports and productivity the positive link between imports and firm 
survival does not come as a surprise. The same holds for the positive link between 
two-way trading (i.e. importing and exporting) and survival. Wagner (2011c) provides 
the first evidence on the role of exports, imports and two-way trade for firm survival in 
                                                            
13 This literature looks at the survival of exporting and non-exporting firms on the home market; studies 
that investigate the determinants of surviving as an exporter on the export market include Ilmakunnas 
and Nurmi (2010) and Wagner (2008a, 2010). 
34 
 
a highly developed country, Germany, one of the leading actors on the world market 
for goods. Descriptive statistics and regression analysis (with and without explicitly 
taking the rare events nature of firm exit into account) point to a strong positive link 
between firm survival on the one hand and imports and two-way trading on the other 
hand, while exporting alone does not play a role for exiting the market or not. It would 
be interesting to see whether this pattern revealed for Germany is the same in other 
countries (and if not, why there is a difference). 
 
4. Discussion 
The numerous empirical studies on international trade and firm performance that 
were published in recent years all added pieces of evidence to the state of our 
knowledge. One important aim of empirical studies in this field of economics (like in 
other fields, too) is to uncover stylized facts that hold over space and time, and that 
can both inspire theoretical models that are based on reasonable assumptions and 
inform policy debates in an evidence-based way. Can the accumulated evidence on 
international trade and firm performance qualify as stylized facts in this sense? I 
doubt. 
On some topics we have a large enough number of empirical studies using 
data from different countries reporting results that point in the same direction so that 
we can paint a big picture – exporters and importers are more productive that non-
exporters and non-importers and they were more productive in the years before they 
started to export or import (self-selection); the number of export markets served 
increases with firm productivity, and exporters to more developed economies have 
superior ex-ante productivity levels than non-exporters and firms exporting to less 
developed countries; firms that serve the home market only are the least productive 
35 
 
group, followed by firms that export and by firms that engage in outward foreign direct 
investment (productivity pecking-order).  
However, this big picture summarizes the results from the studies in a 
qualitative way only. Any attempt to extract information on the size of the effects – the 
economic relevance, not the statistical significance – is hindered by the absence of a 
reasonably high degree of comparability across the studies. This lack of 
comparability is due to differences in the unit of analysis (establishment vs. 
enterprise), the sampling frame (all firms versus firm with a number of employees 
above a certain threshold only), the specification of the empirical models estimated 
and the econometric methods applied. The approach of the International Study 
Group on Exports and Productivity (ISGEP) (2008) to agree on the use of identically 
specified empirical model and identical econometric methods in the analysis of 
comparable samples of comparable data for a number of countries to compute 
estimates for each country and to use a meta-analysis in the second stage to explain 
cross-country differences is a promising way to make progress here. The use of this 
approach in investigations of other topics and for a larger group of countries, 
therefore, is highly recommended. 
Besides topics were we have a big picture already there are others where the 
jury is still out. The most important of these topics is the presence or not of learning-
by-exporting (and learning by importing) effects. Here results differ widely across 
studies (see Silva et al. (2010) for a comprehensive discussion). The use of a 
continuous treatment approach that applies a generalized propensity score approach 
to look for causal effects of different shares of exports in total sales on productivity 
(discussed in section 2.1.3) and that finds that exporting improves labor productivity 
growth only within a sub-interval of the range of firms’ export-sales ratios in German 
36 
 
manufacturing firms should be replicated with data for other countries to shed more 
light on this topic. 
In other sub-fields the number of studies is still too small to argue that we have 
sound empirical evidence on the direction (not to talk about the size) of the link 
between trade and the respective dimension of firm performance. Topics here include 
trade in services and productivity, trade and wages (after controlling for observed and 
unobserved heterogeneity in employers and employees), trade and profits, and trade 
and firm survival. The marginal return to further micro-econometric studies on these 
topics, therefore, is large. 
Furthermore, even in sub-fields of the empirical literature on firm performance 
and trade that lead to a kind of consensus based on results of a large number of 
studies recent research casts doubts that the standard approach applied in these 
studies deal with firm heterogeneity in an adequate way. Cases in point are the 
studies (discussed in section 2.1.3 above) that apply robust methods to deal with 
extreme observations (outliers) in an adequate way and find a dramatic reduction in 
the estimated exporter productivity premium, and that point to different exporter 
productivity premia at different parts of the productivity distribution. The lack of 
replication studies with data from other countries, however, makes it impossible to 
judge whether these results are specific for firms from manufacturing in Germany 
only or of a wider relevance. The marginal return to replication studies, therefore, is 
large in this case, too. 
The bottom line, then, is that we made remarkable progress on the way to 
understand the links between international trade and firm performance over the 
recent past – but we are not yet there.  
 
37 
 
References 
Alcalá, Francisco and Pedro J. Hernández (2010), Firms’ main market, human 
capital, and wages. SERIEs 1 (4), 433-458. 
Altomonte, Carlo and Gabor Békés (2010), Trade Complexity and Productivity. 
CeFiG Working Papers 12, September. 
Amendola, Adalgiso, Anna Ferragina, Rosanna Pittiglio and Filippo Reganati (2010), 
How is the 2007 Crisis Affecting Firms’ Survival? Evidence from Italy, Paper 
presented at ETSG 2010 Lausanne, 9-11 September. 
Amendolagine, Vito, Rosa Capolupo and Nadia Petragallo (2008), Export Status and 
Performance in a Panel of Italian Manufacturing Firms. Università degli Studi 
Bari Dipartomento di Scienze Economiche S.E.R.I.E.S Working Paper No. 27. 
Amiti, Mary and Donald R. Davis (2008), Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and 
Evidence. National Bureau of Economic Research NBER Working Paper 
14106, June. 
Andersson, Martin, Hans Lööf and Sara Johansson (2008), Productivity and 
international trade: Firm Level Evidence from a small open economy. Review 
of World Economics 144 (4), 774-801. 
Augier, Patricia, Olivier Cadot and Marion Dovis (2010), Imports and TFP at the Firm 
Level: The Role of Absorptive Capacity. DEFI, University of Aix-Marseilles, 
mimeo, March. 
Baldwin, John and Beiling Yan (2011), The death of Canadian manufacturing plants: 
heterogeneous responses to changes in tariffs and real exchange rates. 
Review of World Economics 147 (1), 131-167. 
Barba Navaretti, Giorgio and Anthony J. Venables (2004), Multinational Firms in the 
World Economy. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press. 
38 
 
Bas, Maria and Vanessa Strauss-Kahn (2010), Does importing more inputs raise 
exports? Firm level evidence from France. MPRA Paper No. 27315, 
December. 
Baumgarten, Daniel (2010), Exporters and the Rise in Wage Inequality. Evidence 
from German Linked Employer-Employee Data. Ruhr Economic Papers #217, 
October. 
Bausch, Andreas, Thomas Fritz and Kathrin Boeseke (2007), Performance Effects of 
Internationalization Strategies: A Meta-Analysis. Research in Global Strategic 
Management 13, 143-176. 
Bausch, Andreas and Mario Krist (2007), The Effect of Context-Related Moderators 
on the Internationalization-Performance Relationship: Evidence from Meta-
Analysis. Management International Review 47 (3), 319-347.  
Békés, Gabor, Péter Harasztosi and Balázs Muraközy (2011), Firms and Products in 
International Trade: Evidence from Hungary. Economic Systems 35 (1), 4-24. 
Bellone, Flora, Sarah Guillou and Lionel Nesta (2010), To what extent innovation 
accounts for firm export premia? University of Nice – Sophia Antipolis, mimeo, 
February 2010. 
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1995), Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in 
U.S. Manufacturing: 1976 – 1987. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 
Microeconomics 1, 67-119. 
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1999), Exceptional exporter 
performance: cause, effect, or both? Journal of International Economics 47 
(1), 1-25. 
39 
 
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (2007), Firm Structure, Multinationals, 
and Manufacturing Plant Deaths. Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (2), 
193-204. 
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott 
(2007), Firms in International Trade. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (3), 
105-130. 
Bernard, Andrew B. and Joachim Wagner (1997), Exports and Success in German 
Manufacturing. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 133 (1), 134-157. 
Bhattacharya, Rudrani, Ila Patnaik and Ajay Shah (2010), Exports versus FDI in 
services. International Monetary Fund IMF Working Paper WP/10/290, 
December. 
Blanes-Cristóbal, José Vicente, Marion Dovis, Juliette Milgram-Baleix and Ana I. 
Moro-Egido (2008), Do sunk exporting costs differ among markets? Evidence 
from Spanish manufacturing firms. Economics Letters 101 (1), 110-112. 
Bogheas, Spiros and Holger Görg (2008), Organizational forms for global 
engagement of firms. Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Kiel Working 
Papers No. 1448, September. 
Bramati, Caterina Maria and Christophe Croux (2007), Robust estimators for the 
fixed effects panel data model. Econometrics Journal 10 (3), 521-540. 
Brambilla, Irene, Daniel Lederman and Guido Porto (2010), Exports, Export 
Destinations, and Skills. National Bureau of Economic Research NBER 
Working Paper 15995, May. 
Breau, Sébastian and David L. Rigby (2006), Is there really an export wage 
premium? A case study of Los Angeles using matched employer-employee 
data. Center for Economic Studies Discussion Paper CES 06-06, February. 
40 
 
Breinlich, Holger and Chiara Criscuolo (2011), International Trade in Services: A 
Portrait of Importers and Exporters. Journal of International Economics 84 (2), 
188-206. 
Casaburi, Lorenzo, G. Alfredo Minerva and Valeria Gattai (2008), Firms’ International 
Status and Heterogeneity in Performance: Evidence From Italy. Fondazione 
Eni Enrico Mattei Nota di Lavoro 3.2008, January. 
Castellani, Davide, Francesco Serti and Chiara Tomasi (2010), Firms in international 
trade: Importers’ and exporters’ heterogeneity in the Italian manufacturing 
industry. The World Economy 33 (3), 424-457. 
Castellani, Davide and Antonello Zanfei (2007), Internationalisation, Innovation and 
Productivity: How Do Firms Differ in Italy? The World Economy 30 (1), 156-
176. 
Chaney, Thomas (2008), Distorted gravity: the intensive and extensive margins of 
international trade. American Economic Review 98 (4), 1707-1721. 
Conti, Giuliano, Alessia Lo Turco and Daniela Maggioni (2010), Exporters in 
Services: New evidence from Italian firms. Applied Economics Quarterly 56(1), 
73-98. 
Crinò, Rosario and Paolo Epifani (2009), Export intensity and productivity. IAE-CSIC 
and Bocconi University, mimeo, April. 
Damijan, Joze P. and Crt Kostevc (2006), Learning-by-exporting: Continuous 
productivity improvements or capacity utilization effects? Evidence from 
Slovenian Firms. Review of World Economics 142 (3), 599-614. 
Damijan, Joze P. and Crt Kostevc (2010), Learning from trade through innovation: 
Causal link between imports, exports and innovation in Spanish microdata. 
Institute for Economic Research Working Paper No. 48, August. 
41 
 
Damijan, Joze P., Saso Polanec and Janez Prasnikar (2004), Self-selection, export 
market heterogeneity and productivity improvements: Firm level evidence from 
Slovenia. Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, LICOS Centre for Transition 
Economics Discussion Paper 148/2004, May. 
Damijan, Joze P., Saso Polanec and Janez Prasnikar (2007), Outward FDI and 
Productivity: Micro-evidence from Slovenia. The World Economy 30 (1), 135-
155. 
Delgado, Miguel A., Jose C. Farinas and Sonia Ruano (2002), Firm productivity and 
export markets: a non-parametric approach. Journal of International 
Economcis 57 (2), 397-422. 
De Loecker, Jan (2007), Do exports generate higher productivity? Evidence from 
Slovenia. Journal of International Economics 73 (1), 69-98. 
Dovis, Marion and Juliette Milgram-Baleix (2009), Trade, Tariffs and Total Factor 
Productivity: The Case of Spanish Firms. The World Economy 32 (4), 575-
605. 
Eliasson, Kent, Pär Hansson and Markus Lindvert (2009), Do firms learn by exporting 
or learn to export? Evidence from small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
in Swedish manufacturing. Örebro University, Swedish Business School, 
Working Paper No. 15. 
Engel, Dirk and Vivien Procher (2009), Export, FDI and Productivity – Evidence for 
French Firms. Ruhr Economic Papers #111, June. 
Engel, Dirk, Vivien Procher and Christoph M. Schmidt (2010), The Asymmetries of a 
Small World: Entry Into and Withdrawal From International Markets by French 
Firms. Ruhr Economic Papers #192, June. 
42 
 
Eriksson, Tor, Valérie Smeets and Frédéric Warzynski (2009), Small Open Economy 
Firms in International Trade: Evidence from Danish Transaction-Level Data. 
Aarhus School of Business Department of Economics Working Paper 09-7, 
March. 
Esteve-Pérez, Silviano, Juan A. Mánez-Castillejo and Juan A. Sanchis-Llopis (2008), 
Does a “survival-by-exporting” effect for SMEs exist? Empirica 35 (1), 81-104. 
Esteve-Pérez, Silviano, Vicente Pallardó-López and Francisco Requena-Silvente 
(2011), The duration of firm-destination export relationships: Evidence from 
Spain, 1997-2006. Universitat de Valencia Working Papers in Applied 
Economics WPAE-2011-02, January. 
Fafchamps, Marcel (2009), Human Capital, Exports, and Earnings. Economic 
Development and Cultural Change 58 (1), 111-141. 
Forlani, Emanuele (2010), Irish firms’ productivity and imported inputs. CORE 
Discussion Paper 2010/15, April. 
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger and Chad Syverson (2008), Reallocation, Firm 
Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability? American 
Economic Review 98, 1, 394-425. 
Francois, Joseph and Bernard Hoekman (2010), Services Trade and Policy. Journal 
of Economic Literature 48 (3), 642-692. 
Frías, Judith A., David S. Kaplan and Eric A. Verhoogen (2009), Exports and Wage 
Premia: Evidence from Mexican Employer-Employee Data. Columbia 
University, mimeo, August. 
Fryges, Helmut (2009), The Export-Growth Relationship: Estimating a Dose-
Response Function. Applied Economics Letters 16 (18), 1855-1859. 
43 
 
Fryges, Helmut and Joachim Wagner (2008), Exports and Productivity Growth: First 
Evidence from a Continous Treatment Approach. Review of World Economics 
144 (4), 695-722. 
Fryges, Helmut and Joachim Wagner (2010), Exports and Profitability: First Evidence 
for German Manufacturing firms. The World Economy 33 (3), 399-423. 
Gibson, Mark J. and Tim A. Graciano (2011), Costs of Starting to Trade and Costs of 
Continuing to Trade. Washington State University, mimeo, January. 
Görg, Holger and Marina-Eliza Spaliara (2010), Financial Health, exports, and firm 
survival: A comparison of British and French firms. Kiel Institute for the World 
Economy, mimeo, February. 
Grazzi, Marco (2011), Export and Firm Performance: Evidence on Productivity and 
Profitability of Italian Companies. Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade 
(in press). 
Greenaway, David, Joakim Gullstrand and Richard Kneller (2008), Surviving 
globalization. Journal of International Economics 74 (2), 264-277. 
Greenaway, David, Joakim Gullstrand and Richard Kneller (2009), Live or Let Die? 
Altrnative Routes to Industry Exit. Open Economies Review 20 (3), 317-337. 
Greenaway, David and Richard Kneller (2007), Firm Heterogeneity, Exporting and 
Foreign Direct Investment. Economic Journal 117 (February), F134-F161. 
Haller, Stefanie A. (2010), Exporting, Importing, Intra-Firm Trade and Firm 
Performance. ESRI mimeo, March. 
Halpern, László, Koren Miklós and Ádám Szeidl (2005), Imports and Productivity. 
Institute of Economics, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, mimeo, June. 
44 
 
Hayakawa, Kazunobu, Tomohiro Machikita and Fukunari Kimura (2011), 
Globalization and Productivity: A Survey of Firm-Level Analysis. Journal of 
Economic Surveys 25 (1), 19-68. 
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz and Stephen R. Yeaple (2004), Export versus FDI 
with Heterogeneous Firms. American Economic Review 94 (1), 300-316. 
Hirano, Keisuke and Guido W. Imbens (2004). The Propensity Score with Continuous 
Treatments. in: Gelman, Andrew and Xiao-Li Meng (eds.). Applied Bayesian 
Modeling and Causal Inference from Incomplete-Data Perspectives, 
Chichester: Wiley, 73-84. 
Ilmakunnas, Pekka and Satu Nurmi (2010), Dynamics of Export Market Entry and 
Exit. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 112 (1), 101-126. 
International Study Group on Exports and Productivity (ISGEP) (2008), 
Understanding Cross-Country Differences in Exporter Premia: Comparable 
Evidence for 14 Countries. Review of World Economics 144 (4), 596-635. 
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Marcel P. Timmer (2011), Structural Change in Advanced 
Nations: A New Set of Stylised Facts. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 113 
(1), 1-29. 
Kandilov, Ivan T. (2009), Do Exporters Pay Higher Wages? Plant-level Evidence from 
an Export Refund Policy in Chile. World Bank Economic Review 23 (2), 269-
294. 
Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Beverly Lapham (2008), Productivity and the Decision to 
Import and Export: Theory and Evidence. CESifo Working Paper No. 2240, 
March. 
45 
 
Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Joel Rodrigue (2008), Does the use of imported 
intermediates increase productivity? Plant level evidence. Journal of 
Development Economics 87 (1), 106-118. 
Kimura, Fukunari and Kozo Kiiyota (2006), Exports, FDI, and Productivity: Dynamic 
Evidence from Japanes Firms. Review of World Economics 142 (4), 695-719. 
Klein, Michael W., Christoph Moser and Dieter M. Urban (2010), The Contribution of 
Trade to Wage Inequality: The Role of Skill, Gender and Nationality. National 
Bureau of Economic Research NBER Working Paper 15985, May. 
Koenker, Roger (2005), Quantile Regression. Cambridge etc.: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Kostevc, Crt (2008), Foreign market competition as a determinant of exporter 
performance. Evidence from Slovenian manufacturing firms. University of 
Ljubljana, mimeo. 
Kox, Henk L. M. and Hugo Rojas-Romagosa (2010), Exports and productivity 
selection effects for Dutch firms. De Economist 158 (3), 295-322. 
Lawless, Martina (2009), Firm export dynamics and the geography of trade. Journal 
of International Economics 77 (2), 245-254. 
Lööf, Hans (2010), Are Services Different Exporters? Applied Economics Quarterly 
56 (1), 99-117. 
Lööf, Hans and Martin Andersson (2010), Imports, Productivity and Origin Markets: 
The Role of Knowledge-intensive Economies. The World Economy 33 (3), 458 
– 481. 
López Ricardo A. (2006), Imports of intermediate inputs and plant survival. 
Economics Letters 92 (1), 58-62. 
46 
 
Mánez-Castillejo, Juan A., Mariá E. Rochina-Barrachina and Juan A. Sanchis-Llopis 
(2010), Does firm size affect self-selction and learning-by-exporting? The 
World Economy 33 (3), 315-346. 
Martins, Pedro S. and Luca David Opromolla (2009), Exports, Imports and Wages: 
Evidence from Matched Firm-Worker-Product Panels. Institute for the Study of 
Labor IZA DP No. 4646, December. 
Martins, Pedro S. and Yong Yang (2009), The impact of exporting on firm 
productivity: a meta-analysis of the learning-by-exporting hypothesis. Review 
of World Economics 145 (3), 431-445. 
Mayer, Thierry and Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano (2007). The Happy Few: The 
Internationalisation of European Firms. New Facts based on Firm-level 
Evidence. Bruegel Blueprint Series Volume III, November. 
Melitz, Mark J. (2003), The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and 
Aggregate Industry Productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695-1725. 
Munch, Jacob Roland and Jan Rose Skaksen (2008), Human capital and wages in 
exporting firms. Journal of International Economics 75 (2), 363-372. 
Muuls, Mirabelle and Mauro Pisu (2009), Imports and exports at the level of the firm: 
Evidence from Belgium. The World Economy 32 (5), 692-734. 
Namini, Julian Emami, Giovanni Facchini and Ricardo López (2011), Export growth 
and factor market competition: theory and evidence. Department of 
Economics, Erasmus University Rotterdam, mimeo, February. 
Oberhofer, Harald and Michael Pfaffermayr (2011), FDI versus Exports: Multiple Host 
Countries and Empirical Evicence. University of Salzburg Working Papers in 
Economics and Finance N0. 2011-03, February. 
47 
 
Pisu, Mauro (2008), Export destination and learning-by-exporting: Evidence from 
Belgium. National Bank of Belgium Working Paper No. 140, September. 
Powell, David (2009), Unconditional Quantile Regression for Panel Data with 
Exogenous or Endogenous Regressors. RAND Working Paper WR-710, 
October. 
Powell, David and Joachim Wagner (2011), The Exporter Productivity Premium along 
the Productivity Distribution: Evidence from Unconditional Quantile Regression 
with Firm Fixed Effects. RAND Working Paper WR-837, February. 
Redding, Stephen J. (2010), Theories of Heterogeneous Firms and Trade. National 
Bureau of Economic Research NBER Working Paper 16562, December. 
Ruane, Frances and Julie Sutherland (2005), Export Performance and Destination 
Characteristics of Irish Manufacturing Industry. Review of World Economics 
141 (3), 442-459. 
Schank, Thorsten, Claus Schnabel and Joachim Wagner (2007), Do exporters really 
pay higher wages? First evidence from German linked employer-employee 
data. Journal of International Economics 72 (1), 52-74. 
Schank, Thorsten, Claus Schnabel and Joachim Wagner (2010), Higher wages in 
exporting firms: self-selection, export effect, or both? First evidence from 
linked employer-employee data. Review of World Economics 146 (2), 303-
322. 
Serti, Francesco and Chiara Tomasi (2009), Self-selection along different export and 
import markets. Laboratory of Economics and Management – Sant’Anna 
School of Advanced Studies LEM Working Paper 2009/18, November. 
48 
 
Serti, Francesco, Chiara Tomasi and Antonello Zanfei (2010), Who Trades with 
Whom? Exploring the Links between Firms’ International Activities, Skills, and 
Wages. Review of International Economics 18 (5), 951-971. 
Silva, Armando, Óscar Afonso and Ana Paula Africano (2010a), Do Portugese 
Manufacturing Firms Self Select to Exports? Universidade de Porto FEP 
Working Papers N. 371, April. 
Silva, Armando, Óscar Afonso and Ana Paula Africano (2010b), International trade 
involvement and performance of Portuguese manufacturing firms: causal links. 
Instituto Politécnico do Porto – ESEIG, mimeo, July. 
Silva, Armando, Óscar Afonso and Ana Paula Africano (2010c), Economic 
Performance and International Trade Engagement: The Case of Portuguese 
Manufacturing Firms. Universidade de Porto FEP Working Papers N. 369, 
April. 
Silva, Armando, Ana Paula Africano and Óscar Afonso (2010), Learning-by-
exporting: What we know and what we would like to know. Universidade de 
Porto FEP Working Papers N. 364, March. 
Smeets, Valérie and Frédéric Warzynski (2010), Learning by Exporting, Importing or 
Both? Estimating productivity with multi-product firms, pricing heterogeneity 
and the role of international trade. Aarhus University, mimeo, October. 
Singh, Tarlok (2010), Does International Trade Cause Economic Growth? A Survey. 
The World Economy 33 (11), 1517-1564. 
Temouri, Yama, Alexander Vogel and Joachim Wagner (2011), Self-selection into 
export markets by business services firms – Evidence from France, Germany 
and the United Kingdom. Aston Business School and Leuphana University 
Lueneburg, mimeo, March. 
49 
 
Todo, Yasuyuki (2011), Quantitative Evaluation of the Determinants of Export and 
FDI: Firm-level Evidence from Japan. The World Economy 34 (3), 355 – 381. 
Tomiura, Eiichi (2007), Foreign outsourcing, exporting, and FDI: A productivity 
comparison at the firm level. Journal of International Economics 72 (1), 113-
127. 
Tsou, Meng-Wen, Jin-Tan Liu and Cliff J. Huang (2006), Export Acitivity, Firm Size 
and Wage Structure: Evidence from Taiwanese Manufacturing Firms. Asian 
Economic Journal 20 (4), 333-354. 
Verardi, Vincenzo and Christophe Croux (2009), Robust regression in Stata. The 
Stata Journal 9 (3), 439-453. 
Verardi, Vincenzo and Joachim Wagner (2010), Productivity premia for German 
manufacturing firms exporting to the Euro-area and beyond: First Evidence 
from robust fixed effects estimations. University of Luenebug Working Paper 
Series in Economics No. 172, May. 
Verardi, Vincenzo and Joachim Wagner (2011), Robust Estimation of Linear Fixed 
Effects Panel Data Models with an Application to the Exporter Productivity 
Premium. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik 231 (in press). 
Vogel, Alexander (2011), Exporter Performance in the German Business Services 
Sector. The Services Industries Journal 31 (7), 1015 - 1031. 
Vogel, Alexander and Joachim Wagner (2010a), Higher productivity in importing 
German manufacturing firms: self-selection, learning from importing, or both? 
Review of World Economics 145 (4), 641-665. 
Vogel, Alexander and Joachim Wagner (2010b), Exports and Profitability – First 
Evidence for German Business Services Enterprises. Applied Economics 
Quarterly 56 (1), 7-30. 
50 
 
Vogel, Alexander and Joachim Wagner (2011), Robust estimates of exporter 
productivity premia in German business services enterprises. University of 
Luenebug Working Paper Series in Economics No. 207, July. 
Wagner, Joachim (2002), The causal effects of exports on firm size and labor 
productivity: first evidence from a matching approach. Economics Letters 77 
(4), 287-292. 
Wagner, Joachim (2006), Exports, foreign direct investment, and productivity: 
Evidence from German firm level data. Applied Economics Letters 13 (6), 347-
349. 
Wagner, Joachim (2007a), Exports and Productivity: A Survey of the Evidence from 
Firm-Level Data. The World Economy 30 (1), 60-82. 
Wagner, Joachim (2007b), Exports and productivity in Germany. Applied Economics 
Quarterly 53 (4), 353-373. 
Wagner, Joachim (2007c), Productivity and size of the export market – Evidence for 
West and East German plants 2004. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und 
Statistik / Journal of Economics and Statistics 227 (4), 403-408. 
Wagner, Joachim (2008), Export Entry, Export Exit and Productivity in German 
Manufacturing Industries. International Journal of the Economics of Business 
15 (2), 169-180. 
Wagner, Joachim (2010a), From estimation results to stylized facts – Twelve 
recommendations for empirical research in international activities of 
heterogeneous firms. University of Luenebug Working Paper Series in 
Economics No. 186, September (forthcoming, De Economist). 
 
51 
 
Wagner, Joachim (2010b), The post-entry performance of cohorts of export starters 
in German manufacturing industries. University of Luenebug Working Paper 
Series in Economics No. 187, September (forthcoming, International Journal 
of the Economics of Business). 
Wagner, Joachim (2011a), Offshoring and firm performance: self-selection, effects on 
performance, or both? Review of World Economics 147 (2), 217-247. 
Wagner, Joachim (2011b), Exports, imports and profitability: First evidence for 
manufacturing enterprises. University of Luenebug Working Paper Series in 
Economics No. 206, June. 
Wagner, Joachim (2011c), Exports, Imports and Firm Survival: First evidence for 
manufacturing enterprises in Germany. University of Luenebug Working Paper 
Series in Economics No. 211, August. 
Wakasugi, Ryuhei and Ayumu Tanaka (2009), Firm heterogeneity and different 
modes of internationalization: Evidence from Japanese firms. Kyoto Institute of 
Economic Research, KIER Discussion Paper No. 681, September. 
Wilhelmsson, Frederik and Konstantin Kozlov (2007), Exports and productivity of 
Russian firms: in search of causality. Economic Change and Restructuring 40 
(4), 361-385. 
Yashiro, Naomitsu and Daisuke Hirano (2009), Do all exporters benefit from export 
boom? Evidence from Japan. Kyoto Institute of Economic Research, KIER 
Discussion Paper No. 689, December. 
 
 
 
 
52 
 
Table 1: Micro-econometric studies on export destination and productivity 
 
 
Country     Period covered    Topics investigated      Methods used    Important findings 
Author(s)     Areas covered 
(year of publication) 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Belgium     1998 – 2005    Exports and productivity by    Regression; matching  Exporters to more developed economies have  
Pisu      Four groups of    destination        approaches; diff‐in‐  superior ex‐ante productivity levels than non‐ 
(2008)      countries by per              diff      exporters and firms exporting to less developed 
      capita income                    countries. No causal effect of export on productivity 
                            irrespective of development level of destination 
                            countries 
 
Belgium     1996 – 2004    Facts about Belgium firms     Descriptive statistics;  Firms tend to serve only few foreign markets. 
Muuls and Pisu    Country of destination            regressions    Negative relation between number of exporting firms 
(2009)                            and number of export destinations served. Number 
                            of export markets served increase with productivity. 
 
France      2005      TFP differences between      t‐test; Kolmogorov‐  Global exporters have higher productivity than intra‐ 
Bellone, Guillou and  Europe vs. rest    non‐exporters, exporters to    Smirnov‐test; OLS;  Europe exporters while the TFP distribution of intra‐ 
Nesta      of the world    Europe, and global exporters    Quantile regression  Europe exporters is not significantly different from  
(2010)                            the one of non‐exporters. No exporter premium  
                            for only intra‐Europe exporters, but high and 
                                          significant for global exporters. Export premia are 
                            very stable over the different quintiles, but tend to 
 be higher for highest quintiles. 
 
Germany (West/East)  2004      Productivity differences       t‐test; Kolmogorov‐  Exporters inside Euro‐zone more productive than 
Wagner      Euro‐zone vs.              Smirnov‐test; with and  firms selling in Germany only, but less productive 
(2007c)      non‐Euro zone              without top/bottom  than firms selling outside the Euro‐zone too 
                      one percent of the  
                      productivity distribution 
 
53 
 
Germany    2003 – 2006    Productivity premia for exporters    Fixed‐effects linear  Exporters beyond Euro‐zone are more productive 
Verardi and    Euro‐zone versus   to Euro‐zone and beyond; test for    panel data model ‐  than exporters to Euro‐zone only; self‐selection for 
Wagner      Non‐Euro zone    self‐selection        standard and robust  exporters beyond Euro‐zone only. Robust estimation 
(2010)                      version      methods point to tiny exporter premia only. 
 
Ireland      1991 – 1998    Exports and performance by    Regression    Non‐UK exporters are larger than UK exporters in  
Ruane and Sutherland  Exports to UK vs.   destination              terms of turnover ,pay increasingly higher wages, 
(2005)      global exports                    employ a higher proportion of skilled labour and 
                            are more productive. 
 
Ireland      2000 – 2004    Productivity and destinations    Descriptive statistics;  Firms with greater market coverage tend to be 
Lawless      >50 countries of              OLS      more productive. No rigid ordering of destinations 
(2009)      destination                    found. Firm‐level export growth largely driven by   
                            existing markets; most growth due to continuing 
                            exporters. Changes in market portfolios of exporters 
                            a relatively common occurrence. 
 
Italy      1993 – 1997    Firm performance and export    Regression    Productivity levels higher for firms exporting to high 
Serti and Tomasi    Geographical areas  destinations              medium income countries compared to firms  
(2009)                            exporting to European and low income countries. 
                            Results more mixed in terms of size and workforce 
                            composition. Ex‐ante trade premia higher for those 
                            firms that start investing in more advanced countries 
 
Italy      2003      Export intensity and productivity    Descriptive statistics;  TFP strongly negatively correlated with export 
Crinò and Epifani   EU15; new EU members;            regression    intensity to low‐income destinations and 
(2009)      other European countr.;                  uncorrelated with export intensity to high‐income 
      North America; Latin                  destinations, conditional on exporting 
      America; China; other 
      Asian countries; Africa; 
      Oceania 
 
 
 
 
54 
 
Italy      1993 – 1997    Differences between firms with    Descriptive statistics;  Bulk of firms trade only with a few countries, but 
Castellani, Serti and  Countries of    different numbers of countries    non‐parametric kernel  a handful of diversified traders account for the 
Tomasi      destination    of destination        regressions; pooled   majority of exports. Firms that export to larger 
(2010)                      OLS and fixed effects  number of countries are larger, more productive, 
                            and more capital intensive 
Italy      2003      Exporters in services and      Descriptive statistics;  Only more productive and skilled labour endowed 
Conti, Turco and    EU25; EU15; non‐  productivity        regression    firms have a higher probability to export to industrial 
Maggioni    EU; industrial markets                  countries outside Europe 
(2010)      outside Europe 
 
Japan      2005      Productivity and exports by    Regression    Productivity of firms simultaneously internationalized 
Wakasugi and Tanaka  Asia, North America,  destination area              in multiple regions higher than in firms exporting  
(2009)      Europe                      in a single region 
 
 
Japan      2002 – 2005    Productivity effects of export    Diff‐in‐diff    Only exporters  serving worldwide enjoyed significant 
Yashiro and Hirano  Asia, Western, other  boom                advantage in productivity growth 
(2009)      regions 
 
Portugal     1996 – 2003    Self‐selection into exporting    Random‐effects probit  Firms that start exporting only to developed  
Silva, Afonso and   All destination              OLS regression    countries most productive in pre‐entry period,  
Africano     countries of exporters                  together with firms that export to multiple countries. 
(2010a)                            Self‐selection varies over markets, suggesting 
                            different productivity thresholds 
                             
Portugal     1996 – 2003    Learning‐by‐exporting      Propensity score match‐  No learning effect for exporters only  to non‐ 
Siva, Afonso and    All destination              Ing, diff‐in‐diff estimator  developed countries; fast effect for exporters only  
Africano     countries of exporters                  to EU countries; firms that mix several types of 
(2010b)                            destinations get moderately positive effects 
 
Russia      1996 – 2002    Self‐selection versus learning‐    Fixed‐effects, pooled  Firms that export mainly to OECD more productive 
Wilhelmsson and   OECD versus    by‐exporting        OLS, GMM    than firms that exporter mainly to CIS or other 
Kozlov      former Soviet                    countries; evidence for learning‐by‐exporting 
(2007)      Union (CIS) and                    inconclusive 
      other countries 
55 
 
Slovenia     1994 – 2002    Productivity and different     Descriptive statistics;  Firms that export to more markets are on average 
Damijan, Polanec and  Countries of    export markets        OLS, fixed effects,  more labor productive. Only high productivity firms 
Prasnikar    destination              sytem‐GMM    can afford to export to advanced markets. Exporters 
(2004)                            can benefit from exporting through learning and 
                            competition effects only when serving more 
                            demanding advanced markets 
Slovenia     1994 – 2002    Learning‐by‐exporting      Correlations;    Both firms exporting to EU markets as well as   
Damijan and Kostevc  ex‐Yugoslav vs.              matching, diff‐in‐diff  those exporting to former Yugoslav countries 
(2006)      EU                      experience only a one‐time increase in their 
                            productivity the year after they start exporting 
 
Slovenia     1994 – 2000    Productivity and different     Propensity score    Positive correlation between number of 
De Loecker    8 groups of     export markets        matching; regression  destinations and productivity. Productivity  
(2007)      countries                    premia considerably higher for firms shipping 
                            products to more developed regions. Firms  
                            exporting only to low income regions get  
                            additional productivity gains, however, lower 
                            than their counterparts exporting to high income 
                            countries 
 
Slovenia     1994 – 2002    Productivity differences ex ante    OLS; System GMM  More efficient exporters choose to serve more 
Kostevc      EU, Eastern and Central  and learning‐by‐exporting           demanding markets; evidence of the learning 
(2008)      Europe, ex‐Yugoslav                  process not conclusive 
 
Spain      1990 – 2002    Sunk exporting cost differences    Descriptive statistics  Share of exports, advertisement, R&D on sales and 
Blanes‐Cristóbal,   EU, OECD,    between export destination          presence of foreign capital larger for firms that  
Dovis, Milgram‐Baleix,  rest of the world   markets               export to the EU non exclusively and to OECD. 
Moro‐Egido                          Exporters to EU more productive than other  
(2007)                            exporters and than non‐exporters. 
                      Panel Probit    Sunk costs differ among markets, higher in developed 
                            Markets than in rest of the world 
 
 
 
 
56 
 
Spain      1990 – 2002    Learning‐by‐exporting, firm size,    Descriptive statistics  Level of diversification across areas substantially 
Mánez‐Castillejo,   EU; rest OECD;    and area of export destination          higher for large firms than for small firms, and 
Rochina‐Barrachina,  rest of the world                   higher diversification in destination markets is 
Sanchis‐Llopis                          expected to be associated with higher learning 
(2010)                            opportunities 
 
Spain      1997 – 2006    Duration of firm‐destination export  Survival analysis    Firm productivity enhances duration of trade with 
Esteve‐Pérez,    Full portfolio of    relationships              low‐risk countries but has no effect on trade 
Pallardó‐López,    destinations (max.                  survival with high‐risk countries 
Requena‐Silvente  122 countries) 
(2011) 
Sweden      1997 – 2004    Productivity differences      GLS random effects;  Exporter premium for labor productivity is increasing 
Andersson, Lööf    Number of countries            two‐step GMM    in the number of countries which firms export to 
and Johansson    of destination 
(2008) 
 
Sweden      1997 – 2006    Productivity differences      OLS; propensity‐score  Larger firms tend to export to more destination 
Eliasson, Hansson and  Number of countries            matching    countries. Information on destination of exports 
Lindvert     of destination                    not used in investigation of learning‐by‐exporting 
(2009)                            vs. learning‐to‐export 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
 
Table 2: Micro-econometric studies on imports and productivity 
 
 
Country     Period covered  Topics investigated      Methods used      Important findings 
Author(s)      
(year of publication) 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Belgium     1996 – 2004  International trading activities of    Regression analysis, dynamic  Two‐way traders are most productive, followed by 
Muuls and Pisu        firms          panel probit      importing‐only firms, exporting‐only firms and non‐ 
(2009)                            traders. Number of import origins and number of 
                            products imported rise with increasing productivity. 
                            High degree of hysteresis in imports. 
 
Chile      1990 – 1996  Productivity, exports and imports    Regression analysis, ML    Two‐way traders more productive than one‐way 
Kasahara and                  estimation of structural    traders; self‐selection of more productive firms in 
Lapham                    model        import activities. 
(2008) 
 
Chile      1979 ‐ 1996  Imports of intermediate goods and  Fixed Effects, System GMM,  Becoming an importer of foreign intermediates 
Kasahara and         plant performance      TFP using Olley/Pakes and  improves productivity 
Lapham                    Levinsohn/Petrin estimators 
(2008) 
 
 
Denmark    1993 – 2003  Key elements in characterizing     Regression analysis    Entry into importing associated with higher 
Eriksson, Smeets       Danish firms in international trade           productivity in the past 
and Warzynski 
(2009) 
 
Denmark    1998 – 2005  Learning by exporting and/or     Regression analysis    Exporting and importing positively related with firm 
Smeets and         importing                productivity, two‐way traders most productive. 
Warzynski                          Evidence of self‐selection into importing; no  
(2010)                            learning effect. 
 
58 
 
France      1995 – 2005  Link between imported intermediate  Olley‐Pakes and ACF    Positive impact of higher diversification and  
Bas and Strauss‐Kahn      inputs and firms’ exports      estimates of TFP      increased number of imported inputs varieties 
(2010)                            on firms’ TFP. 
 
Germany    2001 – 2005  Productivity differences between firms  Kolmogorov‐Smirnov‐test;  Compared to firms that do not trade at all two‐way   
Vogel and Wagner      that do not trade, exporters, importers   OLS and Fixed Effects;    traders have the highest productivity premium,  
(2010a)          and two‐way traders; test for self‐     Propensity Score Matching  followed by firms that only export, while firms that 
          selection into importing and for learning‐          only import have smallest premium. Evidence for 
          by –importing                self‐selection of more productive firms into imports. 
                            No clear evidence for learning‐by‐importing. 
 
Hungary     1992 – 2003  Description of Hungarian trade data  Regression analysis    Both exporters and importers show better  
Békés, Harasztosi       and key patterns at firm and product          performance than non‐traders 
and Muraközy        level 
(2011) 
 
Hungary     1992 – 2003  Relation between firms’ trading activity  Regression analysis    Evidence of self‐selection of the most productive  
Alomonte and        and productivity                firms into both importing and exporting; when taking 
Békés                            importing status of exporters into account the  
(2010)                            productivity premium of exporters is greatly reduced. 
 
Ireland      2000 ‐ 2006  Firms’ productivity and imported inputs  OLS and Fixed Effects, GMM  Increase in the intensive margin of imports raises 
Forlani                            efficiency of domestic firms. No evidence for self‐ 
(2010)                            selection of more productive firms into importing, 
                            Evidence for learning‐by‐importing. 
 
Ireland      1996 – 2005  Detailed analysis of Irish manufacturing  OLS and Fixed Effects,    On average firms can be ranked in terms of 
Haller          firms engaged in international trade  quantile regression    productivity from low to high as follows: no trade, 
(2010)                            export only, import only, two‐way traders, firms 
                            engaged in intra‐firm trade; within‐group  
                            heterogeneity in some cases exceeds differences 
                            between groups of traders. 
 
 
 
59 
 
Italy      1993 – 1997  Firm performance and different    Descriptive statistics,    Positive correlation between import and firm’s   
Serti and Tomasi        characteristics of markets where    OLS regression, quintile    productivity, two‐way traders have highest 
(2009)          exports are directed  and imports    regression      productivity. Firms sourcing from more than one 
          originate from                group of countries are by far the most productive. 
                            Importers sourcing from developed countries more 
                            productive than firms buying only from low income 
                            countries. Evidence for self‐selection of more  
                            productive firms into importing; importers from high 
                            income countries have higher productivity premium. 
 
Italy      1993 – 1997  Firms’ heterogeneity on the import   OLS and Fixed Effects    Firms engaged in international activities are more 
Castellani, Serti        and the export side              productive; results point to self‐selection but some 
and Tomasi                          post‐entry effects cannot ruled out. Two‐way traders 
(2010)                            outperform one‐way traders. 
 
Portugal     1996 – 2003  Relationship between international  Descriptive statistics, OLS   Two‐way traders outperform only importers, only 
Silva, Afonso and       trade engagement (exports and imports)  and Fixed Effects regression,  exporters and above all domestic firms. Greater  
Africano         and firms’ performance      dynamic panel data model  diversification of imported goods and source markets 
(2010c)                            related to higher productivity. Origin markets of  
                            Imports important for performance. 
 
Portugal     1996 – 2003  Learning‐by‐exporting      Propensity Score Matching;  Learning effects higher for new exporters that are 
Silva, Afonso and                 differences‐in‐differences   also importers or start importing at the same time. 
Africano 
(2010b) 
 
Spain      1991 – 2002  Effects of tariffs and foreign    Olley‐Pakes TFP estimation,  Evidence of additional productivity gains for 
Dovis and Milgram‐      competition on TFP      System‐GMM estimation    importing firms 
Baleix 
(2009) 
 
Spain      1991 – 2002  Effect of imported intermediate    Porpensity score matching and  Starting to import raises productivity when  
Augier, Cadot and      inputs and capital goods on TFP    diff‐in‐diff; Olley‐Pakes and ACF  proportion of skilled labour is controlled for; effect 
Dovis                    estimates      greatest for skill‐intensive firms. 
(2010) 
60 
 
Spain      1991 – 1999  Learning from trade      Propensity Score Matching  Sequencing between imports, exports and innovation 
Damijan and                          Firms learn primarily from import links, which  
Kostevc                            enable them to innovate products and processes and 
(2010)                            to dress up for starting to export in small and 
                            partially medium firms. 
 
Sweden      1997 ‐ 2004  Imports from various groups of     OLS and Fixed Effects,    Instantaneous causality from import to productivity; 
Lööf and Andersson      countries and productivity    dynamic GMM estimator    productivity is an increasing function of the G7 
(2010)                            fraction in total imports. 
 
USA      1997    Evidence on firm imports from    OLS regression      Firm importing relative rarer than firm exporting; 
Bernard, Jensen,        transaction data                41 (79) percent of exporting (importing) firms also  
Redding and Schott                        import (export). Productivity premium positive for 
(2007)                            exporters  and importers compared to firms that do 
                            not trade. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
 
Table 3: Micro-econometric studies on trade and productivity in services firms 
 
 
 
Country     Period covered  Topics investigated      Methods used      Important findings 
Author(s)      
(year of publication) 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
France      2003 – 2007  Comparison of business services    Descriptive statistics, pooled  Exporters are more productive than non‐exporters. 
Temouri, Vogel and      exporters and non‐exporters    OLS and fixed effects,     Self‐selection of more productive firms into exports, 
Wagner                    propensity score matching  no empirical evidence for positive effects of  
(2011)                            exporting on productivity growth. 
 
Germany    2003 – 2005  Exports and enterprise      Descriptive statistics, probit and  Exporters are more productive than non‐exporters; 
Vogel          characteristics in German business   pooled OLS / fixed effects,   evidence for self‐selection of more productive firms  
(2011)          services firms                into exports. 
 
Germany    2003 – 2007  Comparison of business services    Descriptive statistics, pooled  Exporters are more productive than non‐exporters. 
Temouri, Vogel and      exporters and non‐exporters    OLS and fixed effects,     Self‐selection of more productive firms into exports, 
Wagner                    propensity score matching  no empirical evidence for positive effects of  
(2011)                            exporting on productivity growth. 
 
Germany    2003 – 2007  Role of outliers in shaping the    Descriptive statistics, pooled  Estimated exporter premium drops to zero when a 
Vogel and Wagner      relation between exports and    OLS and fixed effects, robust  robust estimator that controls for outliers is 
(2011)          productivity        fixed effects regression    applied. 
 
Italy      2003    Determinants of export      Descriptive statistics,    Exporters are more productive than non‐exporters; 
Conti, Lo Turco and      performance of firms in      regression analysis    more productive firms have higher probability to 
Maggioni        services                  export to more distant and costly markets in terms of 
(2010)                            trade and transport costs. 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
Netherlands    1997 – 2005  Determinants of export      Descriptive statistics,    Exporter productivity premium of services firms  
Kox and          patterns of Dutch firms and    probit, pooled OLS and    positive but smaller than for manufacturing firms.  
Rojas‐Romagosa        plants in manufacturing and    fixed effects      Evidence for self‐selection of more productive firms 
(2010)          services                  into exports, but no evidence for learning‐by‐export. 
     
Sweden      1997 – 2006  Exports of services firms      Pooled OLS, random effects,  Exporter productivity premium larger for services  
Lööf                    fixed effects, dynamic GMM,  firms than for manufacturing firms; self‐selection of 
(2010)                    propensity score matching  more productive firms into exporting, no evidence for 
                            positive effects of exporting on productivity growth. 
 
UK      2000 – 2005  Stylized facts on firms       Descriptive statistics,    Service traders are more productive, but export  
Breinlich and         engaging in service trade (exports    regression analysis    premia smaller for service traders than for goods 
Criscuolo        and imports)                traders. Service exporters are more productive than 
(2011)                            service importers. 
 
UK      2003 – 2007  Comparison of business services    Descriptive statistics, pooled  Exporters are more productive than non‐exporters. 
Temouri, Vogel and      exporters and non‐exporters    OLS and fixed effects,     Self‐selection of more productive firms into exports, 
Wagner                    propensity score matching  no empirical evidence for positive effects of  
(2011)                            exporting on productivity growth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
 
Table 4: Micro-econometric studies on trade, outward foreign direct investiment and productivity  
 
 
Country     Period covered  Topics investigated      Methods used      Important findings 
Author(s)      
(year of publication) 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
France      2002 – 2005  Relation between export, fdi and    Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test   Foreign direct investors exhibit the highest 
Engel and         productivity in French firms    for first‐order stochastic    productivity level followed by exporters and 
Procher                    dominance      domestic companies. Firms with fdi in both low‐wage 
(2009)                            and high‐wage countries more productive than firms 
                            with fdi in low‐wage countries only. 
 
France      2000 – 2007  Internationalization behavior of    Multinomial probit, rare    Domestic firms with higher productivity more 
Engel, Procher        French companies (entry into and    events logit      likely to enter international markets; more  
and Schmidt        exit from foreign markets)            productive firms more likely to enter foreign  
(2010)                            markets via fdi. 
 
Germany    1995    Productivity ranking of       Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test   Foreign direct investors outperform exporters  
Wagner          non‐exporters, exporters and    for first‐order stochastic     which in turn outperform national market 
(2006)          foreign direct investors      dominance of productivity  suppliers. 
                    distribution; t‐test for 
                    differences in means 
 
Germany    1996 – 2002  Test of productivity pecking order    Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test   Exporters outperform firms that serve the domestic 
Arnold and        hypothesis         for first‐order stochastic    market only; firms with outward foreign direct  
Hussinger                  dominance of productivity  investment outperform exporters and firms that 
(2010)                    distribution; quantile regression  sell on the domestic market only. 
 
 
India      2000 – 2008  Differences between manufacturing  Stochastic frontier analysis  In chemicals industry firms with outward fdi are more 
Bhattacharya, Patnaik      and services industries with regard to          productive than exporters, but less productive  
and Shah        productivity pecking order between          software companies do outward foreign direct 
(2010)          exporters and foreign direct investors          investment. 
64 
 
Ireland      1999 ‐ 2000  Relationship between productivity   Multinomial logit     Exporters are more productive than non‐exporters;   
Bogheas and         and choice of form of inter‐            exporting firms that also invest abroad are more 
Görg          nationalization                productive than firms that only export. 
(2008) 
 
Italy      1996    Links between internationalization,  Regression ananlysis,     Productivity highest for firms with manufacturing 
Castellani and Zanfei      innovation and productivity    Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test   activities abroad, followed by firms with non‐ 
(2007)                            manufacturing activities abroad only, followed by 
                            firms with exports only, followed by firms that serve 
                            the domestic market only. 
 
Italy      1998 – 2003  Link between productivity    Regression analysis;    Firms that engage in foreign production of final goods 
Casaburi, Minerva      and firms’ international activities    Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test   in addition to export activities are more productive  
and Gattai                          than firms that only export abroad; purely domestic 
(2008)                            producers are the less productive firms. 
 
Japan      1994 – 2000  Relationship between exports,     Fixed effects regression    The most productive firms engage in foreign direct 
Kimura and Kiyoto      foreign direct investment and firm           investiment and exports, medium productive firms 
(2006)          productivity                engage in either exports or foreign direct investment, 
                            least productive firms serve only domestic market. 
 
Japan      1998    Document the extent to which    Descriptive statistics    Foreign outsourcers and exporters tend to be less 
Tomiura         firms engage in global activities and to          productive than the firms active in FDI or in multiple 
(2007)          evaluate how productivity varies with          globalization modes but more productive than 
          the choice of globalization mode            domestic firms. 
 
Japan      2005    Role of productivity in sorting of    Descriptive statistics,    Productivity smallest for firms supplying the domestic 
Wakasugi and        firms into exporting and fdi between  regression analysis,    market only, followed by exporters, followed by firms  
Tanaka          North and South as well as between  multinomial logit model    that have fdi in North America and Europe;    
(2009)          single and multiple destinations            productivity of firms with fdi in Asia lower than that  
                            of exporters to Asia. 
 
Japan      1997 – 2005  Determinants of export  and FDI    Mixed  logit model    Productivity level positively affects probability of 
Todo          decision of Japanese firms            engaging in export and FDI, but impact of 
(2011)                            productivity is negligible in magnitude. 
65 
 
Slovenia     1994 ‐ 2002  Empirical test of the productivity    Descriptive statistics,     Productivity advantage of exporting firms and firms 
Damijan, Polanec and      pecking order hypothesis with    regression analysis, probit  with outward foreign direct investment over firms 
Prasnikar        Slovenian data                that serve the domestic market only, but no  
(2007)                            statistically significant productivity advantage of firms 
                            with foreign affiliates over exporting firms. 
 
10 European Countries1         ‐ 2    Ceteris paribus influence of    Bivariate probit      More productive firms less (more) probably use 
Oberhofer and        productivity on probability of            the export (foreign direct investment) strategy 
Pfaffermayr        exporting and using fdi              to serve foreign markets. 
(2011) 
 
 
Notes:   1 Croatia, Cyprus, France, Greece, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom (91.5% of firms from UK or France) 
  2 not reported 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
 
Table 5: Micro-econometric studies on trade and wages using linked employer-employee data 
 
 
 
Country     Period covered  Topics investigated      Methods used      Important findings 
Author(s)      
(year of publication) 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Denmark    1995 – 2002  Human capital and wages     Linked employer‐employee  Inclusion of an interaction term between export 
Munch and        in exporting firms      panel data; individual level  intensity and the proportion of educated workers at 
Skaksen                   wage regressions using spell‐  the firm level enters the wage equation with a  
(2008)                    fixed effects       significant positive effect. Exporting per se does not 
                            matter for wages. 
 
Germany     1993 – 1997  Do exporters pay higher      Linked employer‐employee  Exporting per se hardly matters for wages, but wages 
Schank, Schnabel      wages, cetris paribus?      panel data; individual level  increase with share of exports in total sales ceteris 
and Wagner                  wage regressions using spell‐  paribus. 
(2007)                    fixed effects to control for 
                    unobserved firm and worker 
                    heterogeneity 
 
Germany     1994 – 2006  Direction of causality       Linked employer‐employee  Exporter wage premium already exists in the years  
Schank, Schnabel      between exports and      panel data; individual level  before firms start to export (self‐selection), but does 
and Wagner        wages          wage regressions and     not increase in the years after exporting started (no 
(2010)                    propensity score matching  causal effect of exports on wages). 
 
Germany    1993 – 2007  Skill structure of the wage    Linked employer‐employee  Significant export wage premium for workers in the 
Klein, Moser and       premia in exporting firms      panel data; individual level  two highest skill categories, evidence of an export 
Urban                    wage regressions with worker‐  wage discount for lower‐skilled workers. 
(2010)                    firm spell effects 
 
 
 
 
67 
 
 
Germany    1996 ‐2007  Role of exporting firms in      Linked employer‐employee  Wage differential between exporters and non‐ 
Baumgarten        explaining rising wage      panel data; individual level  exporters increased substantially; changes in skill 
(2010)          dispersion        wage regressions; decomposi‐  compositions and skill prices can only account for a 
                    tion of change wage dispersion  small fraction of this increase. Rising exporter wage 
                            gap contributed to growth in wage dispersion. 
 
Mexico      1993 ‐ 2001  Relationship between exports    Linked employer‐employee  Approximately two thirds of the correlation between 
Frías, Kaplan and       and wage premia      panel data; dynamic panel  plant level average wages and plant size can be 
Verhoogen                  approach.      explained by exporter wage premia and one third by 
(2009)                            workforce composition (levels); nearly all of the  
                            Differential within‐industry wage change due to the 
                            export  shock (peso devaluation of late 1994) is 
                            explained by changes in wage premia (changes). 
 
Morocco    2000    Education wage premium in    Linked employer‐employee  No evidence that exporters pay higher premium to 
Fafchamps        exporting and non‐exporting     data (10 workers per firm);  educated workers; no evidence that firms that start 
(2009)          firms          firm fixed effects     to export or increase exports increase wages as well; 
                            no evidence that workers who switch jobs enjoy  
                            larger pay increase if start to work for an exporter. 
 
Portugal     1995 – 2005  Relation of exports, imports    Linked employer‐employee  Firms that increase their exports (imports) of high‐ 
Martins and        types of goods traded with    panel data combined with  (intermediate‐) technology products tend to increase 
Opromolla        wages          firm‐transaction panel data;  their salaries. 
(2009)                    job‐spell fixed effects 
 
Spain      2002    Destination market effect in    Linked employer‐employee  Output‐market exporter wage premia are increasing 
Alcalá and        exporter wage premium      data; individual level     in market remoteness and employer education. 
Hernández                  regressions with worker and 
(2010)                    firm characteristics 
 
U.S. (Los Angeles)  1990, 2000  Wage premium in exporting    Linked employer‐employee  After controlling for worker characteristics the export 
Breau and Rigby        firms          data; individual level wage  wage premium vanishes. 
(2006)                    regressions 
 
68 
 
Table 6:  Micro-econometric studies on exports and profits 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Country     Period covered  Topics investigated      Methods used      Important findings 
Author(s)      
(year of publication) 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
France      2003 – 2007  Exports and profitability       Descriptive analysis;    Services exporters are more profitable than non‐ 
Temouri, Vogel         in business services enterprises    regression analysis;    exporters. No evidence for self‐selection of more 
and Wagner                  propensity score matching  profitable firms into exporting. No evidence for 
(2011)                            positive effects of exports on profitability. 
 
 
Germany    1999 – 2004  Exports and profitability      Descriptive analysis;     Exporters are more profitable than non‐exporters,  
Fryges and        in manufacturing enterprises    regression analysis;    but difference is small; rate of profit tends to  
Wagner                    generalized propensity    increase with export‐sales ratio. No evidence for 
(2010)                    score methodology    self‐selection of more profitable firms into exports. 
                            Positive causal effect of exporting on profitability 
                            almost over the whole domain of the export ‐sales 
                            ratio. 
 
Germany    2003 – 2005  Exports and profitability       Descriptive analysis;    Services exporters are less profitable compared to  
Vogel and         in business services enterprises    regression analysis;    non‐exporters, though difference is small. Evidence 
Wagner                    generalized propensity    for self‐selection of less profitable services firms into 
(2010b)                    score methodology    exports. No positive causal effect of exports on  
                            profits. 
 
Germany    2003 – 2007  Exports and profitability       Descriptive analysis;    Services exporters less profitable than non‐exporters. 
Temouri, Vogel         in business services enterprises    regression analysis;    Self‐selection of less profitable firms into exports. No 
and Wagner                  propensity score matching  evidence for positive effects of exporting on profits. 
(2011) 
 
 
 
69 
 
Germany    2003 – 2006  Exports, imports and profits    Descriptive analysis;    No statistically significant and economically large 
Wagner (2011b)        in manufacturing enterprises    non‐parametric tests;    effects of trade on profits. 
                    Pooled OLS and fixed‐effects 
                    regressions; robust pooled 
                    and fixed effects regressions 
 
Italy      1995 – 2003  Exports and performance in    Regression analysis;    Profitability difference between exporters and non‐ 
Amendolagine,        manufacturing firms      propensity score      exporters not reported. No evidence for self‐ 
Capolupo and                  matching      selection of more profitable firms into exporting. 
Petragallo                          Evidence for positive effects of exports on profits. 
(2008) 
 
Italy      1989 – 2004  Trade and profitability      Descriptive analysis; non‐   No evidence for profitability differential between 
Grazzi                    parametric comparison of   exporters and non‐exporters over all; positive  
(2011)                    distributions; regression analysis  relation for some sectors, negative for others. 
 
Netherlands    1997 – 2005  Exports and performance of    Descriptive analysis; OLS     Profitability higher in exporting firms. Evidence for 
Kox and          manufacturing and services firms    and probit regression    self‐selection of more profitable firms into exporting. 
Rojas‐Romagosa                          No positive effects of exporting on profitability. 
(2010) 
 
United Kingdom    2003 – 2007  Exports and profitability       Descriptive analysis;    Services exporters do not differ in profitability 
Temouri, Vogel         in business services enterprises    regression analysis;    compared to non‐exporters. No evidence for self‐ 
and Wagner                  propensity score matching  selection of more profitable firms into exports. No 
(2011)                            evidence for positive effects of exporting on profits. 
 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
 
Table 7: Micro-econometric studies on international trade and firm survival 
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Country     Period covered  Topics investigated    Methods used      Important findings 
Author(s)      
(year of publication) 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Canada      1979 – 1996  Effects of changes in    Probit estimates for    Exporters have much lower failure rates than non‐exporters 
Baldwin and         tariffs and real exchange    exit        but their survival is more sensitive to changes in tariffs and 
Yan          rates on plant death            real exchange rates.  
(2011)                         
 
Chile      1990 – 1999  Imports of intermediate    Probit estimates for    Importers are more likely to survive. Exporters are more likely 
López          inputs and plant survival    exit        to survive but only if they import intermediate inputs.  
(2006)                          Exporting itself does not seem to decrease probability of exit. 
                           
Chile      2001 – 2006  Costs of starting to trade    Transition probabilities    Importers are less likely to exit than non‐importers. 
Gibson and Graciano      and costs of continuing    to exit 
(2011)          to trade 
 
Chile      1990 – 1999  Export growth and factor    Probit and IV‐probit     Importers of intermediate inputs are more likely to survive  
Namini, Facchini        market competition    estimates for 3‐year survival  than non‐importers. Exporting firms are more likely to survive 
and López                        than non‐exporting firms, but probability of survival decreases 
(2011)                          with sector‐wide export volumes. 
 
Denmark    1993 – 2003  Evidence on exports and    Probit estimate for exit    Exporters are less likely to exit than non‐exporters. 
Eriksson, Smeets       imnports by product and 
and Warzynski        origin / destination 
(2009) 
 
France      1998 ‐ 2005  Financial constraints,     Probit estimate for exit    Continuous exporters face a higher probability of survival 
Görg and         exports and firm survival            compared to starters, continuous non‐exporters and firms 
Spaliara                          exiting the exporting market. 
(2010) 
71 
 
Germany    2001 – 2007  Likelihood of survival of firms  Probit; rare events logit    Strong positive link between firm survival and imports and  
Wagner (2011c)        that do not trade, only export,          two‐way trade; exporting only does not play a role for 
          only import, or export and          probability to exit the market. 
          import 
 
Italy      2002 – 2008  Differential effects of firm and  Probit estimates for exit    Exporting has a very high negative marginal impact on firm 
Amendola et al.        industry level variables on          exit. 
(2010)          likelihood of survival 
 
Japan      1994 – 2000  Export, FDI and      Cox proportional hazard    Exports have positive impacts on firm survival. Exporters face 
Kimura and        productivity      model        hazard rate that is lower than non‐exporters. 
Kiyota 
(2006) 
 
Spain      1990 – 2002  “Survial‐by‐exporting”    Discrete time proportional  Exporting SMEs face a significantly lower probability of failure 
Esteve‐Pérez,         effect for small and medium  hazard models      than non‐exporters. 
Mánez‐Castillejo and      sized enterprises (SME) 
Sanchis‐Llopis 
(2008) 
 
Sweden      1980 – 1996  Effects of international trade  Descriptive statistics;    Firms which export are less likely to close down. 
Greenaway,         on firms’ strategies for    multinomial logit 
Gullstrand and Kneller      industry exit 
(2008) 
 
Sweden      1980 – 1996  Role of firm and industry    Descriptive statistics;    Firms which export are less likely to close down. 
Greenaway,         characteristics for exit    multinomial logit      
Gullstrand and Kneller      decision of firms 
(2009) 
 
United Kingdom    1998 ‐ 2005  Financial constraints,     Probit estimate for exit    Continuous exporters face a higher probability of survival 
Görg and         exports and firm survival            compared to starters, continuous non‐exporters and firms 
Spaliara                          exiting the exporting market. 
(2010) 
 
72 
 
 
U. S.      1992 – 1997  Determinants of plant    Probit estimates for plant   Exporting is associated with large reduction in probability 
Bernard and        closures       death        of closedown. 
Jensen 
(2007) 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Working Paper Series in Economics 
(recent issues) 
 
No.209: Roland Olbrich, Martin F. Quaas, and Stefan Baumgärtner: Personal norms of 
sustainability and their impact on management – The case of rangeland management in 
semi-arid regions, August 2011 
No.208: Roland Olbrich, Martin F. Quaas, Andreas Haensler and Stefan Baumgärtner: Risk 
preferences under heterogeneous environmental risk, August 2011 
No.207: Alexander Vogel and Joachim Wagner: Robust estimates of exporter productivity premia 
in German business services enterprises, July 2011 
No.206: Joachim Wagner: Exports, imports and profitability: First evidence for manufacturing 
enterprises, June 2011 
No.205: Sebastian Strunz: Is conceptual vagueness an asset? Resilience research from the 
perspective of philosophy of science, May 2011 
No.204: Stefanie Glotzbach: On the notion of ecological justice, May 2011 
No.203: Christian Pfeifer:  The Heterogeneous Economic Consequences of Works Council 
Relations, April 2011 
No.202: Christian Pfeifer, Simon Janssen, Philip Yang and Uschi Backes-Gellner:  Effects of 
Training on Employee Suggestions and Promotions in an Internal Labor Market, April 
2011 
No.201: Christian Pfeifer:  Physical Attractiveness, Employment, and Earnings, April 2011 
No.200: Alexander Vogel: Enthüllungsrisiko beim Remote Access: Die Schwerpunkteigenschaft 
der Regressionsgerade, März 2011 
No.199: Thomas Wein: Microeconomic Consequences of Exemptions from Value Added 
Taxation – The Case of Deutsche Post, February 2011 
No.198: Nikolai Hoberg and Stefan Baumgärtner: Irreversibility, ignorance, and the 
intergenerational equity-efficiency trade-off, February 2011 
No.197: Sebastian Schuetz: Determinants of Structured Finance Issuance – A Cross-Country 
Comparison, February 2011 
No.196: Joachim Fünfgelt and Günther G. Schulze: Endogenous Environmental Policy when 
Pollution is Transboundary, February 2011 
No.195: Toufic M. El Masri: Subadditivity and Contestability in the Postal Sector: Theory and 
Evidence, February 2011 
No.194: Joachim Wagner: Productivity and International Firm Activities: What do we know?, 
January 2011 
No.193: Martin F. Quaas and Stefan Baumgärtner: Optimal grazing management rules in semi-
arid rangelands with uncertain rainfall, January 2011 
No.192: Institut für Volkswirtschaftslehre: Forschungsbericht 2010, Januar 2011 
No.191: Natalia Lukomska, Martin F. Quaas and Stefan Baumgärtner: Bush encroachment 
control and risk management in semi-arid rangelands, December 2010 
No.190: Nils Braakmann: The causal relationship between education, health and health related 
behaviour: Evidence from a natural experiment in England, November 2010 
  
No.189: Dirk Oberschachtsiek and Britta Ulrich: The link between career risk aversion and 
unemployment duration: Evidence of non-linear and time-depending pattern, October 
2010 
No.188: Joachim Wagner: Exports and Firm Characteristics in German Manufacturing industries, 
October 2010 
No.187: Joachim Wagner: The post-entry performance of cohorts of export starters in German 
manufacturing industries, September 2010 
No.186: Joachim Wagner: From estimation results to stylized facts: Twelve recommendations for 
empirical research in international activities of heterogenous firms, September 2010 
[forthcoming in: De Economist] 
No.185: Franziska Dittmer and Markus Groth: Towards an agri-environment index for biodiversity 
conservation payment schemes, August 2010 
No.184: Markus Groth: Die Relevanz von Ökobilanzen für die Umweltgesetzgebung am Beispiel 
der Verpackungsverordnung, August 2010 
No.183: Yama Temouri, Alexander Vogel and Joachim Wagner: Self-Selection into Export 
Markets by Business Services Firms – Evidence from France, Germany and the United 
Kingdom, August 2010 
No.182: David Powell and Joachim Wagner: The Exporter Productivity Premium along the 
Productivity Distribution: First Evidence from a Quantile Regression for Fixed Effects 
Panel Data Models, August 2010 
No.181: Lena Koller, Claus Schnabel und Joachim Wagner: Beschäftigungswirkungen arbeits- 
und sozialrechtlicher Schwellenwerte , August 2010 
[publiziert in: Zeitschrift für Arbeitsmarktforschung 44(2011), 1-2, 173-180] 
No.180: Matthias Schröter, Markus Groth und Stefan Baumgärtner: Pigous Beitrag zur 
Nachhaltigkeitsökonomie, Juli 2010 
No.179: Norbert Olah, Thomas Huth and Dirk Löhr: Monetary policy with an optimal interest 
structure, July 2010 
No.178: Sebastian A. Schütz: Structured Finance Influence on Financial Market Stability – 
Evaluation of Current Regulatory Developments, June 2010 
No.177: Franziska Boneberg: The Economic Consequences of One-third Co-determination in 
German Supervisory Boards: First Evidence from the German Service Sector from a 
New Source of Enterprise Data, June 2010 
[forthcoming in:  Schmollers Jahrbuch / Journal of Applied Social Science Studies] 
No.176: Nils Braakmann: A note on the causal link between education and health – Evidence 
from the German short school years, June 2010 
No.175: Torben Zülsdorf, Ingrid Ott und Christian Papilloud: Nanotechnologie in Deutschland – 
Eine Bestandsaufnahme aus Unternehmensperspektive, Juni 2010 
No.174: Nils Braakmann: An empirical note on imitative obesity and a puzzling result, June 2010 
No.173: Anne-Kathrin Last and Heike Wetzel: Baumol’s Cost Disease, Efficiency, and 
Productivity in the Performing Arts: An Analysis of German Public Theaters, May 2010 
No.172: Vincenzo Verardi and Joachim Wagner: Productivity premia for German manufacturing 
firms exporting to the Euro-area and beyond: First evidence from robust fixed effects 
estimations, May 2010 
 
 
  
No.171: Joachim Wagner: Estimated capital stock values for German manufacturing enterprises 
covered by the cost structure surveys, May 2010 
[published in: Schmollers Jahrbuch / Journal of Applied Social Science Studies 130 
(2010), 3, 403-408] 
No.170: Christian Pfeifer, Simon Janssen, Philip Yang and Uschi Backes-Gellner: Training 
Participation of an Aging Workforce in an Internal Labor Market, May 2010 
No.169: Stefan Baumgärtner and Martin Quaas: Sustainability Economics –  general versus 
specific, and conceptual versus practical, May 2010 
[forthcoming in: Ecological Economics] 
No.168: Vincenzo Verardi and Joachim Wagner: Robust Estimation of Linear Fixed Effects Panel 
Data Models with an Application to the Exporter Productivity Premium, April 2010  
No.167: Stephan Humpert: Machen Kinder doch glücklich? April 2010 
No.166: Joachim Wagner: Produktivität und Rentabilität in der niedersächsischen Industrie im 
Bundesvergleich. Eine Benchmarking-Studie auf der Basis vertraulicher Firmendaten 
aus Erhebungen der amtlichen Statistik, April 2010 
erschienen in: Statistische Monatshefte Niedersachsen, Sonderausgabe "Kooperation 
Wissenschaft und Statistik - 20 Jahre Nutzung von amtlichen Mikrodaten", S. 30 - 42 
No.165: Nils Braakmann: Neo-Nazism and discrimination against foreigners: A direct test of taste 
discrimination, March 2010 
No.164: Amelie Boje, Ingrid Ott and Silvia Stiller: Metropolitan Cities under Transition: The 
Example of Hamburg/ Germany, February 2010 
No.163: Christian Pfeifer and Stefan Schneck: Relative Wage Positions and Quit Behavior: New 
Evidence from Linked Employer-Employee-Data, February 2010 
No.162: Anja Klaubert: “Striving for Savings” – religion and individual economic behavior, 
January 2010 
No.161: Nils Braakmann: The consequences of own and spousal disability on labor market 
outcomes and objective well-being: Evidence from Germany, January 2010 
No.160:  Norbert Olah, Thomas Huth und Dirk Löhr: Geldpolitik mit optimaler Zinsstruktur, Januar 
2010 
No.159: Markus Groth: Zur Relevanz von Bestandseffekten und der Fundamentalen 
Transformation in wiederholten Biodiversitätsschutz-Ausschreibungen, Januar 2010 
No.158: Franziska Boneberg: Die gegen das Drittelbeteiligungsgesetz verstoßende 
Aufsichtsratslücke existiert. Replik zu „Das Fehlen eines Aufsichtsrates muss nicht 
rechtswidrig sein“ von Alexander Dilger, Januar 2010 
erschienen in: Zeitschrift für Industrielle Beziehungen, 1 (2010) 
No.157: Institut für Volkswirtschaftslehre: Forschungsbericht 2009, Januar 2010 
No.156: Alexander Vogel, Joachim Wagner, Kerstin Brunken und Arno Brandt: Zur 
Beschäftigungsentwicklung in der Region Hannover - Ein Vergleich mit 12 deutschen 
Verdichtungsräumen, Dezember 2009 
No.155: Nils Braakmann and Joachim Wagner: Labor market adjustments after a great import 
shock: Evidence from the German clothing industry and the Multi-Fibre Arrangement, 
December 2009 
 
 
 
(see www.leuphana.de/institute/ivwl/publikationen/working-papers.html for a complete list) 
  
Leuphana Universität Lüneburg 
Institut für Volkswirtschaftslehre 
Postfach 2440 
D-21314 Lüneburg 
Tel.: ++49 4131 677 2321 
email: brodt@leuphana.de 
www.leuphana.de/institute/ivwl/publikationen/working-papers.html  
 

