D
IS
C
U
S
S
IO
N
 P
A
P
E
R
S
2
01
0
effective regulatory  
institutions for air transport:  
a european perspective
Hans-Martin NIEMEIER
University of Applied Sciences, Bremen, Germany
Joint Transport Research Centre 
ROUND TABLE
2-3 December 2010, Paris
20
 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 1 
JOINT TRANSPORT RESEARCH CENTRE 
 
 
 
 
Discussion Paper No. 2010-20 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared for the Round Table of 2-3 December 2010 on  
“Effective Regulatory Institutions: The Regulator’s Role 
in the Policy Process” 
 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTIVE REGULATORY INSTITUTIONS FOR AIR TRANSPORT 
A EUROPEAN PERSPECTIVE 
 
 
 
 
Hans-Martin NIEMEIER 
University of Applied Sciences Bremen 
GERMANY 
 
 
 
 
November 2010 
 
 
 
The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily represent 
positions of the University of Applied Sciences Bremen, 
the OECD or the International Transport Forum. 
 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 2 
 
 
 
International Transport Forum 
 
The  International Transport Forum  is an  inter‐governmental body within the OECD family. The 
Forum  is  a  global platform  for  transport policy makers  and  stakeholders.  Its objective  is  to  serve 
political  leaders and a  larger public  in developing a better understanding of the role of transport  in 
economic  growth  and  the  role  of  transport  policy  in  addressing  the  social  and  environmental 
dimensions of sustainable development. The Forum organises a Conference for Ministers and leading 
figures from civil society each May in Leipzig, Germany. 
The  members  of  the  Forum  are:  Albania,  Armenia,  Australia,  Austria,  Azerbaijan,  Belarus, 
Belgium,  Bosnia‐Herzegovina,  Bulgaria,  Canada,  Croatia,  the  Czech  Republic,  Denmark,  Estonia, 
Finland,  France,  FYROM, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,  Iceland,  India,  Ireland,  Italy,  Japan, 
Korea,  Latvia,  Liechtenstein,  Lithuania,  Luxembourg,  Malta,  Mexico,  Moldova,  Montenegro,  the 
Netherlands, New  Zealand, Norway,  Poland,  Portugal, Romania, Russia,  Serbia,  Slovakia,  Slovenia, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the United States. The Forum’s 
Secretariat is located in Paris. 
 
Joint Transport Research Centre 
 
The OECD and the International Transport Forum established a Joint Transport Research Centre 
(JTRC)  in  2004.  The  Centre  conducts  co‐operative  research  programmes  addressing  all modes  of 
transport to support policymaking in Member countries and contribute to the Ministerial sessions of 
the International Transport Forum. 
 
 
JTRC Discussion Papers 
 
The JTRC Discussion Paper Series makes economic research, commissioned or carried out at the 
Joint Transport Research Centre, available to researchers and practitioners. The aim is to contribute 
to  the understanding of  the  transport  sector and  to provide  inputs  to  transport policy design. The 
Discussion Papers are not edited by the JTRC and they reflect the author's opinions alone. 
 
The Discussion Papers can be downloaded from: 
www.internationaltransportforum.org/jtrc/DiscussionPapers/jtrcpapers.html  
 
The International Transport Forum’s website is at: www.internationaltransportforum.org/  
 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ON THE DISCUSSION PAPERS AND OTHER JTRC ACTIVITIES, PLEASE 
EMAIL: ITF.CONTACT@OECD.ORG
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 3 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 5 
 
2. EFFECTIVE REGULATORY INSTITUTIONS FOR AIR TRANSPORT .................................... 7 
 
3. VALUE CHAIN OF AIR TRANSPORT ........................................................................................ 9 
 
 3.1. Value chain of air transport..................................................................................................... 10 
 3.2. Regulatory intervention .......................................................................................................... 15 
 
4. SUMMARY: REFORM OF REGULATORY INSTITUTIONS .................................................. 28 
 
NOTES ................................................................................................................................................... 32 
 
REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................................... 34 
 
 
 
 
Bremen, November 2010 
 

Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 5 
 
 
 
“ Member States shall guarantee the independence of the independent supervisory authority by 
ensuring that it is legally distinct from and functionally independent of any airport managing body and 
air carrier. Member States that retain ownership of airports, airport managing bodies or air carriers or 
control of airport managing bodies or air carriers shall ensure that the functions relating to such 
ownership or control are not vested in the independent supervisory authority.” Article 11 (3) EU 
Directive on Charges 
“As for Frankfurt Airport, the Hesse Ministry of Economics, Transport, Urban and Regional 
Development (HMWVL) – which is the responsible government entity for aviation – is clearly 
separated and acts independently from the Hesse Ministry of Finance, which represents the state’s 30 
per cent shareholder interest in Fraport. Stefan Schulte, 2009, p. 8) 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
Self-evident things are usually taken for granted and people act on them without questioning their 
rationale. For example, no citizen of the European Union (EU) would question in principle the 
independency of law courts. Law courts are designed to judge independently and people have recourse 
to appeal if that is not the case. In regards to regulatory institutions, deciding on airport charges, this 
however seems to be different. It took the EU Commission about twenty years to put the EU directive 
on airport regulation into law. This law mandates member states to set up an independent regulatory 
authority for airports. The debate over this directive is not over though. The word ‘independent’ has 
yet to be clearly defined. Indeed it appears probable that the European Union might end up with 
regulators whose independence is so restricted that the true meaning of independence has been turned 
on its head. 
The heated debate on the regulatory framework for airports, which if wrongly designed might 
lead to regulatory capture and regulatory failure, has highlighted the importance of creating good 
institutions for air transport in general. This is especially important, because airports are moving from 
public utility type of state owned organisations to an industry with a mixture of competitive and 
monopolistic elements, different forms of ownership and levels of commercialisation all influenced by 
different types of implicit and explicit regulatory regimes. To give a few examples of these changes: 
• Airport privatisation began in the late 1980s with BAA and has lead to fully privatised 
industry in the UK with only a few exceptions. This differs remarkably from the rest of 
Europe where only a minority of airports are partially privatised. These changes were 
accompanied by changes in regulation. The UK has adopted an independent regulatory body 
while most continental states lack such an institution.  Elsewhere Australia and New Zealand  
6  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
have privatised some of their airports as well. Australia went initially through a phase of 
price cap regulation and changed later to a monitoring system. New Zealand abolished ex-
ante regulation, but later re-regulated airports. 
• Competition among airports, which hardly existed twenty years ago, developed due to the 
privatization and the liberalization of down stream markets. A consequence of this was the 
influence on the scope and method of regulation. Again, these challenges are best observed 
in the UK. The English Competition Commission directly influenced the market structure 
when it ordered the break up of BAA (which is currently disputed for different reasons in the 
courts). In turn the regulator initiated an inquiry into how to change regulation to encourage 
a more competitive environment. The positive effects of competition can replace regulation, 
which makes it necessary to decide which airports should or should not be subject to 
regulation. For example Manchester airport has been de-designated, while Stansted not, 
although the later decision remains controversial. In the Netherlands, the Dutch regulator 
assessed the market power of Schiphol and reached the conclusion that regulation should be 
continued, as changes in the market structure are currently not politically feasible. With 
growing demand for air transport and liberalization of the downstream market, more 
competition among airports will develop. This will call into question the necessity of airport 
regulation. Regulatory authorities will increasingly be faced with the decision which airports 
should be regulated and which should be left on their own. 
• Privatisation of air traffic control (ATC) has also been an issue in Europe. The UK partially 
privatised NATS1 and price-caped it. In Germany partial privatisation of ATC was stopped 
on legal grounds in 2006 but is still an option, although a rather political one. 
• Liberalisation and privatisation of airlines have lead to intense competition in many parts of 
the world and have changed the vertical relationship between infrastructure providers and 
users. Access to and prizing of often scarce infrastructure becomes increasingly important 
for airlines as means to compete. In turn it is also crucial for airports and ATC providers to 
utilize given capacity and to finance new capacity. Scarcity and monopolistic rents are 
created and can be reaped by the stakeholders using increasingly sophisticated strategies. 
• Air transport has always been subject to external shocks, but in a liberalised and (partially) 
privatised environment the question of who bears the risks is important. In particular the 
question arises how to design institutions that not only are capable of implementing cost 
based regulation, but also incentive based regulation with the risk of substantial losses for 
infrastructure providers. 
• Finally, strategic behaviour of airlines and other stakeholders has become vital for 
profitability and competitive position. Hence policy makers will face substantial and 
increasing rent seeking behaviour of stakeholders. This will certainly not facilitate the task of 
developing effective regulatory institutions. 
This paper addresses the following two research questions:  
1. What parts of the value chain of air transport are ex-ante regulated?  
2. Is this ex-ante regulation carried out by effective regulatory institutions or should the 
regulatory institutions be reformed? 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 7 
Regulation here is defined as rules which inhibits the freedom of contract and thereby determines 
price, quantity, quality, investment and access. This might lead to a stalling of infrastructure 
expansions and high congestion costs. Environmental and safety regulations are not covered in this 
analysis, although they might lead to high safety fees and longer travelling times. Furthermore the 
coordination of competition policy is also not covered.  
Given the wave of cross country alliances and mergers it is important to apply comparable 
regulations across nations. However, this paper confines itself to ex-ante regulation. The focus of the 
paper is entirely on the regulatory framework and not on its content, like specific methods of 
regulation. 
The paper addresses the two posed questions in reversed order. Section 2 defines the concept of 
effective regulatory institutions. Section 3 describes the value chain of air transport and how the state 
intervenes with what type of regulatory institution. The final section summarises the results by 
highlighting the institutional reforms necessary to make regulation effective. 
2.  EFFECTIVE REGULATORY INSTITUTIONS FOR AIR TRANSPORT 
There are two rationales, an economic and a political one, for an effective regulatory institution 
for public utilities applicable to air transport. The economic rationale is to ask how to effectively 
correct for market failure and how to develop instruments and institutions to correct for it. The 
political rationale asks if and how politics should delegate power to independent institutions such as a 
regulator or a commission. Both approaches are complementary and have much in common (Bartle 
and Vass, 2007). They view the problem of public utilities as a contracting problem with asymmetric 
information between principals and agents (Gomez Ibanez, 2003). 
The economic rationale justifies ex-ante regulation if an industry has persistent market power and 
regulation increases economic welfare. The absence of any close substitute due to barriers of entry 
creates persistent market power. This might be due to legal and planning restrictions leading to a lack 
of attractive locations or to a production technology of a natural monopoly characterized by a 
combination of economies of scale and scope2 and sunk cost. The latter is due to the fact that assets are 
highly specific and cannot be easily redeployed (Baumol et al. 1977, Forsyth, 1997).  
Market failure can be corrected by a variety of different governance models, particularly by state 
ownership and by regulated, private monopolies. For the latter model the question arises how to 
encourage private investment in a regulated framework? Privatisation of such an industry is not 
straight forward. A major problem is how to write long term contracts for fixed investments, which 
have value only in a specific exchange relation. Asymmetric information makes it infeasible to write 
complete long term contracts that cover all contingencies. Hold-up problems due to opportunistic 
behaviour might occur so that markets and long term contracts fail. The central problem is to create 
discretionary commitment – a point summarized by Gomez-Ibanez (2003, p.3): “The expensive, 
durable and immobile investments help make all parties – the company, its customers, and the 
government – vulnerable to opportunism and desirous of stability and commitment”. In particular 
Levy and Spiller (1994), Stern (1997) and Stern and Holder (1999) argue stability and commitment 
can be best achieved by an independent regulator , an institution with limited discretionary power 
8  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
which provides long term creditability and trust, expertise and flexibility without arbitrariness. Such 
an independent regulator should be part of a well designed and functioning legal system and it should 
prevent regulatory capture by either the regulated firm (Stigler, 1971) and/or consumer groups 
(Posner, 1971). With respect to airports Wolf (2004) argues that an independent regulator is a 
necessary condition for full privatisation. An independent regulator applying incentive regulation is 
necessary because airports might otherwise take hostages like partial government shares in order to 
protect their investment in a specific asset. 
The political rationale argues that politicians should delegate discretionary power to an agency in 
order to avoid time inconsistent decisions and opportunistic behaviour. Both are relevant to the 
organisation of public utilities irrespective of the form of ownership because of the long term 
immobile asset specific character of these investments. Majone (1997, p.152) points out that 
“independent agencies enjoy two significant advantages: expertise and the possibility of making 
credible policy commitments”. Democratically elected governments have only power for a short period 
of time and cannot bind future governments, but they can assign limited discretionary power to 
independent regulators which have expertise and are committed to long term political goals. 
Independent central banks, the European Commission and independent utility regulators are examples 
of these “non-majoritarian institutions” (Thatcher and Sweet, 2002), which exercise public authority 
in well-defined areas of public policy and which are neither elected nor directly controlled by 
politicians. This rationale is independent from the question of ownership and can be applied to 
publicly owned utilities as well. For example, instead of managing a public utility through a public 
bureau it might be better to form an independent agency or to corporatize a public utility regulated by 
an independent authority. 
From both of these strands of theory it follows that an independent regulator with discretionary 
power is a good governance model for public utilities. This will become important when analysing the 
air transport sector, which is characterized by a variety of institutions, among them corporatized, 
partially to fully privatised public utilities. 
These theories have also defined principles and criteria of effective regulatory institutions which 
have been adopted by the OECD3 (1995, 1997) and by a number of high income countries (for 
example UK4) and low income countries (for example Brazil, Chile5): 
• Legislative mandate from elected legislature. Regulators should have a well defined set of 
objectives from their parliament. These objectives must be clearly defined and separate the 
regulator from general policy making and from the management of public utilities. The legal 
framework should separate the roles and responsibilities and define principles of good 
regulation.  
• Independency and accountability to democratic bodies. The independency can be 
undermined directly by the regulated firm and or by users, termed regulatory capture. For 
independency it is necessary to separate the function of regulation from the function of 
ownership and management of public utilities. The regulator must be separated from 
ministries owning or managing fully or partly public utilities. It must be an autonomous body 
with secure funding. Officers should not be dismissed unfairly by politicians and should not 
benefit personally from their decisions for example by being offered senior positions in firms 
they have regulated. Delegation of discretionary power to a regulator must be controlled by 
parliament. The regulator should exculpate to parliament for example with an annual report. 
The regulated firms and the users of public utilities (for example independent consumer 
bodies) must have the right to appeal against regulatory decisions by being able to take the 
regulator to court. 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 9 
• Fair, accessible and open process. Public hearings and consultation should be part of any 
good regulatory approach. Results should not be predetermined. The results should be 
published and it should be made transparent why consulters’ comments may have been 
adopted or rejected. Fair processes also provide for predictability and trust as changes cannot 
occur arbitrarily. Predictability and trust are especially important to avoid hold-up problems. 
Predictability should not be misunderstood such that processes should not be subject to 
adaptation through learning and evolutionary change. Vass (2006, p. 204) points out that this 
is one of the “fundamental lessons“ for good regulatory governance: “Achieving sound 
regulation and an effective regulatory state is an evolving process, where mistakes are made 
and lessons learned.” 
• Cost effective regulatory processes. The legislative mandate should be effectively 
implemented avoiding high bureaucratic costs. Regulation is not an end in itself, but should 
serve the end to increase economic welfare. It should create a net benefit to society. This 
implies that the scope and method of regulation should be assessed by a third party in terms 
of benefits and costs (For an overview on various methods see ACCC, 2010).  
• Well targeted and temporary. The causes for persistent market power are not natural in the 
sense that they do not change over time. Deregulation of at least parts of the value chain for 
public utilities has been successful in many jurisdictions. This raises the question which part 
of the value chain and which firms should be subject to regulation. The answer to this should 
be part of an inquiry in which the regulator and the stakeholders participate, but the final 
decision should be taken by a third party. 
These principles can be applied to public utilities in general. In applying it, it is important to 
differentiate between vertical integrated and disintegrated public utilities. In vertical integrated 
industries such as the water industry the regulator becomes the key regulator between the regulated 
firms and the final consumers. Unlike the water industry the services of air transport industry are 
unbundled at least in those countries which have deregulated their airline industry. For such an 
industry the task of regulation includes not only price and quality of service but also access to the 
monopolistic bottlenecks. 
3.  VALUE CHAIN OF AIR TRANSPORT AND REGULATORY INTERVENTION 
In this section, the value chain of air transport is described in order to provide an overview on 
how the industry is vertically organized and which parts of the chain are regulated. Then regulation is 
analysed in more depth and the question is addressed if regulation is in line with the criteria for 
effective regulatory institutions. 
 
10  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
3.1. Value Chain of Air Transport 
The nature of air transport is changing and in many countries different forms of organisation are 
used. Gomez-Ibanez (2003), building on Williamson (1985), differentiates between spot markets, 
private contracts, concession contracts, discretionary regulation, public enterprises and hybrid forms. 
In air transport almost all these organisational forms are practised. Interestingly there is no country 
which has organised air transport as a privatised vertically integrated public utility subject to 
regulation. Typically a disaggregated approach has been adopted consisting of regulated infrastructure 
and partly liberalised downstream market. 
 
Figure 1.  Value Chain of Air Transport 
 
Purchase/ Leasing of aircraft 
S2: Sale of aviation services 
S3: Request for fuel and refueling of aircraft 
S4: Application for Airport slots (for fully coordinated and schedule facilitated  airports only) 
S5: Request for Infrastructure 
S6: Request for Ground Handling Services (e.g. Cleaning, Catering, Push-Back) 
S7: Request for Airway slots and Air Traffic Control Services 
S8: Request for Ground Handling infrastructure 
S9: Request for office space 
 
Demand for air transport is a derived demand stemming from the final demand for investment 
and consumption goods and services. Airlines sell their final products consisting largely of seats and 
freight transport directly via the internet or indirectly through travel agents and freight agents to 
consumers and firms (see figure above, S 2). The internet has substantially decreased the market 
power of booking systems and has reduced the market share of travel agents over the last ten years. 
Air fares are traded on spot markets, part of packages with holiday services or other services like car 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 11 
rental, hotel rooms, travel insurance and so on. In the business segment airlines sell their tickets at a 
discount to large companies. These down-stream markets are more or less competitive industries 
subject to competition law, but not to economic regulation.  
Compared to international shipping the airline market is still a tightly regulated industry. The 
major markets in the US, Europe and Asia Pacific have been deregulated internally. Liberalisation has 
been a success story (Morrison and Winston, 1992). In the US air fares decreased in real terms by 40 
per cent from 1976 to 2001 and about 60 per cent of this drop can be attributed to deregulation 
(Morrison, 2002)6. European deregulation is in line with the US experience. According to Arndt 
(2004) liberalization caused fares to fall by 31 to 35 per cent in real terms for the period 1989 to 2000. 
Passengers gained 311 US Dollar per trip in 1999 (in 1989 prices).  
Since 2000 Low Cost Carriers have intensified competition gaining larger market shares. This is 
especially the case with Southwest in the US, where its entry forced fares down on direct routes, but to 
a lesser extent on adjacent routes. Morrison (2002) termed this the “Southwest Effect”. Similar effects 
are observed in Europe when Ryanair enters a market. It appears though that direct competition is the 
main driver, while potential competition has a rather weak effect. Therefore aviation markets are seen 
as not contestable (Borenstein, 1992). Although airplanes are still seen as ‘capital with wings’, part of 
airlines fixed costs are sunk like for example developing hub operations or the marketing of routes. 
Furthermore, incumbent airlines are not reacting slower to market entry than new entrants. They have 
developed sophisticated pricing strategies, but are nevertheless forced in times of crisis to short run 
marginal cost pricing. Airlines have difficulties to cover their high fixed costs and have a low 
profitability. Overall, the welfare gains of deregulation are so large that re-regulation is not a serious 
policy option. It is a market with imperfections driven by economies of scope and density (Caves, et 
al. 1984, Brueckner and Spiller, 1994) subject to competition law regarding mergers and alliances, 
predatory pricing, cartels and price fixing (for an overview see Lee, 2006).  
Regulation comes into force if airlines try to serve destinations in other countries. For these 
services they need traffic rights (‘freedoms of the air’). Restrictive air service agreements allow for 
only a limited number of flights and carriers thereby artificially reduce supply and have fares above 
competitive levels. The rents are reaped by the designated airlines. Open skies agreements usually 
eliminate these regulations and the associated rents but some forms of ownership restrictions still 
prevent competing airlines to access markets (Doganis, 2002). The economic rationale for regulation 
is weak, but as a completely liberalised aviation market is not on the political agenda of even the most 
liberal countries like the US, regulation of air service agreements is analysed below.  
Airlines acquire a number of inputs from upstream markets. Aircrafts are bought from 
manufacturers or are leased from specialised leasing companies (S1). There is a functioning secondary 
market for leasing and buying aircrafts. Aircraft production is characterised by learning economies and 
state subsidies. There are only a few producers in certain market segments like large wide body 
aircrafts. Overall there is no need for economic regulation, but for competition and trade policy. 
Airlines are buying fuel on the world oil market using different types of contracts including 
hedging against risk of oil price changes (see S3). As refuelling can only be done on the ground, 
airports might create access problems for ground handling services (see below). Furthermore, airports 
have the opportunity to cross subsidize fuel for certain carriers or certain destinations. 
Airlines need the right to start and land at the airport they intend to serve. This is no problem at 
airports with ample capacity, but it creates access problems at busy airports. Outside the US, airlines 
apply for airport slots at schedule facilitated and fully coordinated airports (see S4). The slot 
coordinator distributes slots following rules defined in line with the IATA rules. In the US busy 
12  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
airports were rationed by a first come first served principles (grand-father rights). Only at a limited 
number of high density airports slot trading was practised. More or less ineffective forms of peak and 
congestion pricing have been practised only by a few airports notably Heathrow, Manchester and 
Stansted. 
The way how scarce resources are allocated in air transport creates substantial welfare losses. 
Morrison and Winston (2008) estimate an annual welfare loss of US$ 6 billion for US-airports. Mott 
Mac Donald (2006) estimate that secondary trading of slots would lead to a gain in consumer surplus 
of + € 31bn and producer surplus + € 1.2 bn at current rates in 2025. Furthermore, the link between 
scarcity prices and investment is not working so that substantial welfare losses might occur due to a 
too low level of investment. Very often the runway is the constraining factor, but in some cases like 
for example Vienna and Bratislava ATC sets the limit. Slot allocation creates a number of access 
problems and regulation is analysed in more detail below. 
Air traffic control (ATC) services (S7) are another indispensable input for airlines. These services 
consist of local services at an airport and on route services in the upper7 air space. ATC guides the air 
craft from the gate to the takeoff runway and controlling the flight within a certain radius of the 
airport. Then it is handed over to the en route manager who guides it to the final destination and hands 
it to the local ATC provider. ATC is responsible for coordinating flights on the ground and in the air 
so that air transport is safe and delays are minimized. Given the high fixed costs and that there cannot 
be two competing air traffic managing systems in the same flight corridor combined with safety 
concerns makes most of the ATC services a natural monopoly8 regulated or controlled by the state in 
some way or the other (Oster and Strong, 2008). Large differences between different ATC 
organizations in terms of cost efficiency and delay management have lead to a variety of different 
forms of governance. In addition ATC systems have not adjusted their price structure if demand 
increases and peak and congestion problems occur. A reform of ATC will create win-win situations 
but also losers and winners.9 Precise efficiency assessment is difficult due to the fact that as Button 
(2010, p. 22) argues ATC has to meet complex “societal demands for safety and, security, and 
environmental protection”. … There remains the challenge of moving towards best practices in terms 
of developing new institutional structures and technical standards” .Part of these institutional 
structures will be regulation, which will be analysed below. 
Airlines buy from airports a wide range from services (S5) and airports supply direct and indirect 
services to both airlines and passengers. Airports provide aircraft movement facilities including 
aprons, run - and taxiways and passenger processing facilities consisting of aerobridges, baggage 
systems, check in, public areas in terminals, flight information displays and landside roads. At some 
airports terminals are leased to airlines and ground handling is performed by the airlines or third party 
providers (see below). Some airports provide local ATC others not (see below). Airports supply also 
non-aeronautical services such as car parking, restaurants, administrative office space and other 
commercial and retail services.  
Airports have been depicted as natural monopolies due to their asset specificity and economies of 
scale. The empirical evidence for the latter is not conclusive as studies show that economies of scale 
run out at levels in the range of 3 to million 90 million passengers (Niemeier, 2009). The sunk costs 
character of airport investment is unanimously acknowledged, but differs from the kind of services. 
The runway can be redeployed to uses creating only marginal value but office space in a terminal can 
be used for other value creating uses. The market power of an airport depends in particular on the 
available substitutes. This differs from airport to airport and for the type of service. For example, there 
are good substitutes available for Manchester airport because nearby Liverpool airport offers good 
services for origin and destination traffic and Heathrow is the more attractive hub for connecting 
traffic. Other airports such as Dublin or the two Parisian airports10 lack such good substitutes.  
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 13 
Airports with persistent market power do not necessarily have persistent market power across all 
services. Some have market power for local origin and destination traffic in specific market segments 
and hardly any market power in the freight market. Some have market power in the provision of 
aeronautical services but only limited in the non-aeronautical services. For example Schiphol airport 
has market power in the provision of aeronautical charges for business travellers, but the market power 
for parking is limited by a well functioning public transport system. Some of the profits an unregulated 
airport with market power reflect market power but can also reflect locational rents. The charges for 
aeronautical services are generally subject to some form of regulation (see below). Some airlines use 
long term contracts with airports. For example low cost airlines like Ryanair have long term contracts 
with low cost airports like Charleroi airport.  
A few airports like Bordeaux, Bremen and Schiphol have differentiated their product and provide 
dedicated low cost terminals. Airlines and airports are usually not vertically integrated, but terminals 
are leased to airlines. In the US, Europe and Australia some airports have dedicated terminals. 
Lufthansa has a share in Fraport, its main hub and has a joined ownership agreement with Munich 
over a terminal building. 
In the last 20 years airports have developed their non-aeronautical business on a large scale. The 
share of non-aeronautical revenues has risen up to fifty per cent of total revenues at some airports 
(Graham, 2008). This growth has happened although most of these airports are subject to a single till 
regulation, which indirectly taxes these activities. Furthermore, airports have voluntarily restricted 
their prices on non-aviation products and services to a high street level 
Airports have chosen different contractual arrangements to organize commercial activities 
ranging from vertical integration to different forms of long term contracts. Dublin Airport Authority 
(formerly Aer Rianta) and BAA plc are the most notable exceptions for in-house production of the full 
range of commercial services. Other airports have usually outsourced many of these activities to 
specialised companies. Graham (2008) differentiates between concession contracts, management 
contracts and joint venture arrangements. This shows that many of these services involve specific 
investments, but there is little evidence for market failure (see below). An exception might be car 
parking, which generally is very profitable and airports located in cities with poor public transport 
might have gained substantial market power. 
The heterogeneity of airport services makes is necessary to identify in which services airports 
have substantial market power. How regulatory institutions deal with this problem is analysed below. 
Before this ground handling, a service provided by airlines and airports, is described. 
Ground handling consists of ramp, baggage, freight and mail, fuel and oil and central 
infrastructure services (see figure below). These services can be provided in-house by airlines 
themselves, by airlines as third party handlers, by independent ground handling companies and by 
airports. Ground handling services are not bought on a spot market but by five to seven years contracts 
or are produced in-house. 
 
14  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
Figure 2.  Overview of the vertical chain for different ground handling processes 
 
Source: Templin (2006). 
 
In many European countries ground handling was traditionally either a monopoly of the airport or 
a monopoly of the flag carrier. But the rational for such monopolies has always been rather weak. 
Ground handling services do not need a high degree of specific investments and is therefore regarded 
as a contestable market (Templin, 2006) which can in principal be liberalized. This has been attempted 
by the EU Commission with the Directive 96/67. The directive faced a lot of resistance from various 
stakeholders in particular airports and labour unions. Nevertheless it has lead to substantial changes. 
More and more countries have liberalized ground handling (see figure below) and “in general, prices 
for ground handling services decreased since the introduction of the Directive” (Airport Research 
Center, 2009, p.18). However, opening up of markets faces a number of obstacles. The report of 
Airport Research Center (2009) on behalf of the EU Commission states that at “airports where the 
airport operators stayed active, the market share of airport ground handling companies have 
decreased, but remained on a high level” (ibid. p. 18). The report argues that incumbents still have 
substantial market power and that competition is less effective due to access problems. How access is 
regulated is analysed below.  
 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 15 
Figure 3.  Types Liberalization of Ground handling Services in Europe 
 
  Source: Airport Research Center (2009). 
 
3.2. Regulatory intervention 
This part focuses on institutional problems of regulation in air transport. This is a wide field as 
regulation differs from country to country and in many countries regulation is not very transparent. 
Therefore this paper cannot provide a comprehensive overview, but gives examples how basic 
regulatory questions are addressed.  
The questions to be answered are  
• In which parts of the value chain is it necessary for economic or for overriding political 
reasons to regulate ex ante? 
• Which institution is fulfilling this task? 
• Is this institution well designed or could it become more effective? 
These questions are answered in turn by analysing airlines (designation of airlines in restrictive 
ASAs), airports (charges and access to ground handling), ATC (regulation of charges) and slot 
coordination. 
 
16  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
Airlines 
Due to political factors air service agreements will hardly be abolished in the foreseeable future, 
but partial liberalization with the occurrence of Low Cost Carriers on international routes increasingly 
challenges the incumbent position create rents for designated carriers and creates political tensions. 
This raises three questions for regulation 
• Who decides on air service agreements? 
• Who designates which competing carriers? 
• Who designates which competing airports? 
 
In nearly all countries the Department of Transport and/or the Department of International Affairs 
negotiate ASA and thereafter designate airlines and airports. The only exception seems to be Australia 
(see below). Elsewhere politics dominates. Recent examples are the blocked entry of Air Asia X on 
the route from Malaysia to Sydney and of Emirates on the route Stuttgart to Dubai. In the case of Air 
Asia X liberalisation would undermine the monopoly of Malaysian Airlines fully owned by the 
government of Malaysia. The private airline Air Asia X is campaigning for this by painting the slogan 
“Liberate Sydney. End the Monopoly” on its newest aircraft backed by Sidney airport11 (Associated 
Press, 2010). In Germany the ASA allows Emirates only to serve a limited number of airports. In the 
1990’s restrictive ASAs even named airports so that competition among large secondary airports was 
restricted. With growing demand and technological changes secondary airports become increasingly 
attractive to be served directly. As part of the privatization process the City State of Hamburg urged 
the Federal Government to liberalize restrictive ASA faster and give up restrictions on a number of 
airports. The initiative was based on a study by Gillen et al. (2001) that liberalization of ASA with 
Canada, Chile, China, Ghana, Japan, Russia, Thailand, UAE, and Ukraine increases consumer surplus 
by 20 per cent and producers surplus by 9 per cent. The German transport ministers of the 16 States 
and the Federal Department of Transport also approved the proposal, that negotiations should be 
guided by the principle of welfare maximization (cf. VMK, 2000). This initiative faced initially 
resistance from Lufthansa which was fully privatised in the period from 1994 to 1997 and from the 
Länder government of Hesse and Bavaria with the two hubs Frankfurt and Munich. Nevertheless, the 
initiative succeeded and led to further liberalisation until the emergence of Emirates in 2005. The 
“Inititative Luftverkehr für Deutschland” (German Air Transport Initiative) formed in 2003 by the two 
hubs, Lufthansa and the German ATC provider characterized the Emirates as a major challenge to 
Lufthansa and to the German economy. Full liberalisation with the Gulf States would cause yearly 
losses of 700,000 passengers and 2,000 jobs from 2012 onwards (Initiative Luftverkehr für 
Deutschland, 2007). The study was based on an input output model and did not address the question of 
economic welfare. Nevertheless the Initiative won in the cases of Berlin and Stuttgart although in the 
latter the prime minister of Baden Württemberg directly intervened by calling chancellor Merkel.  
These examples show ASAs create substantial rents for which stakeholders are effectively 
lobbying. The arguments also show an important weakness. Instead of calculating the benefits and 
costs of liberalisation dubious effects are calculated on the basis of crude input-output models, which 
neglect substitution effects and treat the economy as being in a persistent state of unemployment. The 
result is a mercantilist policy preventing foreign carriers from entering the market, a decrease in 
competition and less international division of labour. 
In Australia the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local 
Government of Australia is responsible for negotiating bilateral air service agreements and thereby 
determines  the  available  capacity  while  the  International  Air  Services  Commission  allocates  the  
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 17 
capacity to airlines. The Commission was established under the International Air Services 
Commission Act 1992 as an independent statutory authority. Its overall objective is to promote 
“economic efficiency through competition in the provision of international air services, resulting in: 
• increased responsiveness by airlines to the needs of consumers, including an increased range 
of choices and benefits; and  
• growth in Australian tourism and trade; and  
• the maintenance of Australian carriers capable of competing effectively with airlines of 
foreign countries “ (International Air Services Commission, 2009, p.4) 
The Commission assesses the proposals of competing carrier on public benefit criteria. It invites 
all interested carriers to apply and has made the process open and fair. It consists of a Chairperson and 
two other members. The Governor-General12 appoints the members of the Commission usually for a 
period of 5 years and can re-appoint the members (International Air Services Commission Act 1992, 
Part 5). The Commission has substantial discretionary powers. It usually allocates the scarce capacity 
for a period of five years, but can shorten this period and can review its decisions if a carrier might not 
follow the rules, in particular if a carrier has not used the allocated capacity. It can hold public 
hearings for example on the development of specific routes. The authority communicates actively with 
stakeholders and interested parties. The Commission asks them to monitor its performance, which has 
been rated highly in particular its transparent and fair procedure. Also, the Commission advises the 
department on ASA in general. Both institutions consult each other on prospective new applicants. 
The Commission submits a yearly report to the DOT, which passes it on to Parliament (International 
Air Services Commission, 2009). 
 
Airports 
In most parts of the world airports are regulated in some form or another. This raises the 
following questions 
• Are airports regulated by an independent body? 
• Who decides which airports are subject to regulation? 
• Who decides which airport services should be regulated? 
 
The EU directive on Charges in article 11 (3) demands that ”Member States shall ensure that the 
independent supervisory authority exercises its powers impartially and transparently.” However, the 
problem with this is that independency is not clearly defined and allows member states to keep the 
status quo (see below figure). The discussion between airlines has been intense on the EU level and in 
the member states. German airlines have demanded that the DOT establishes an independent regulator 
because the regulator, the Obersten Luftfahrbehörden, of the Länder, faces a conflict of interest. They 
sit very often on the board of directors of the commercialised airports and are part of the government 
of federal states, which partially own airports. The regulator for network industries should also 
regulate airports. Airports claim that airport are a competitive industry and suggest not changing the 
‘well functioning regulatory system’. They fear that a change might create a new bureaucracy. 
Furthermore, they claim that the function of ownership and regulation are separated if both functions 
are performed by two different ministries of one government. This is clearly ad odds with the concept 
of effective regulation and allows for regulatory capture (Beckers et al., 2010). In Austria these two 
18  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
functions have been separated because the regulator, the DOT, is independent from the owner of 
airports. Airports are, as in the case of Vienna, partially owned by the Länder and other municipalities 
and fully in the case of regional airports. Nevertheless, airlines demand a reform and would like to set 
up a regulatory body which is more independent from the government.  
 
Figure 4.  Regulation of European Airports 
44
Regulation of European airports
4
☺ Independent 
regulator (all with
user consultation)
User consultation
(but no independent 
regulator)
☺
☺
☺
☺
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
* User consultation at Malta 
International Airport
 
It is remarkable that the UK and Irish regulatory system have been copied in Australia but not in 
Europe with the notable exception of the Netherlands. Australia and New Zealand have independent 
regulators.   
The EU directive on airport charges answers the question, which airports are subject to regulation 
by defining a threshold of 5 million passengers per year over which all airports are subject to 
regulation. This is a rather imprecise answer to a complicated question, which so far only some 
independent regulators have carefully analyzed. Only the UK, Netherlands and Australia have 
analysed the market power of individual airports in their studies (CAA, 2007; Competition 
Commission, 2003, 2008 and 2009, Bilotkach, 2010 Productivity Commission, 2002). These studies 
differentiate between the different services for aircraft movements, passenger processing and non-
aeronautical activities. The next step is to define the relevant market in order to identify sources of 
substitution for the airport’s services. The market definition is not an end in itself, but part of a more 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 19 
comprehensive assessment using quantitative and qualitative analysis. The market power of an airport 
depends in particular on a number of demand and supply characteristics including capacity and slot 
allocation. The results of the inquiry of Productivity Commission (2002) into the market power of 
Australia airports in 2002 are reported in table 1. 
 
Table 1.  Market power for particular airports 
 
Airport Market 
segment 
Destination 
substitution
Modal 
substitution 
Airport 
substitution 
Market 
power 
Adelaide Business, VFR Low Moderate Low Moderate 
Alice 
Springs 
Holiday High Moderate High Low 
Sydney Business, VFR Low Moderate Low High 
Melbourne Business, VFR Low Moderate Low High 
 
Source: Based on PC (2002). 
 
Australia has some geographical particularities and there is no effective competition from other 
transport modes. But even for this country it is obvious that a notion like the airport industry has 
substantive market power are misleading. European airports are facing more competitive restraints 
than Australians. Given this fact and that airports of a certain size must be regulated it is hard to 
explain why up to now in most countries neither departments of transport nor competitive 
commissions have assessed the market power of airports. For Europe it probably means that regulation 
is too narrow and to wide.  
Similar the question in which airport services an airport has market power has been largely 
neglected. The answer depends in particular on the availability of substitutes at the airport or off 
airport as the results of the study of Productivity Commission (2002) show (table 2). 
 
20  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
Table 2.  Market power in particular airport services 
 
Service Market power Assessment 
Air craft movement facilities High Essential facility 
Passenger processing 
facilities 
High Essential facility. 
Lounge  Low No evidence to constrain supply of 
space 
Vehicle access facilities High Incentive to shift demand to car parking 
Car parking Low/mod. Short term parking limited by other 
modes 
Taxi facilities Low/mod. Charges limited by competing modes 
Aircraft refueling Mod./high High switching cost for refueling 
Aircraft light maintenance Mod. Access to side for third parties 
Aircraft heavy maintenance Low Low switching costs 
Flight catering facilities Low Good off airport locations available 
Freight facility & storage 
sites 
Low Good off airport locations available 
Waste disposal facilities Low Good off airport locations available 
Administrative office space Low/mod. Incentive to constrain supply of space 
Commercial & retail services Low Retail rentals reflect locational rent  
 
Source: Based on PC (2002). 
 
Ground handling 
The directive 96/67/EC has slowly opened the market for ground handling services in Europe. 
The remaining regulatory questions to be answered are twofold. 
• How to provide non-discriminatory access to central infrastructure? 
• How to tender out the right to provide services at airports with a restricted number of 
providers? 
Central Infrastructure. Article 8 of the directive defines the concept of centralised infrastructure 
explicitly as consisting of services like baggage handling system, de-icing facilities, passenger bridges, 
fixed power installations, toile services and check in systems. It is up to the member states to define 
these services in a transparent manner and to add other services to the list. The actual list is long and 
divers (See Airport Research Center, 2009, p.113). The centralised infrastructure should and must be 
used by all suppliers and provided to them without discrimination. It should be priced transparently 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 21 
and fairly. The pricing has been criticized as too high by independent ground handling companies and 
by handling airlines (ibid p. 117). Airlines demand that “fees for the Centralised Infrastructure and the 
access to airport installation should be treated similarly to airport charges and included in the 
regulation” (ibid, p. 117). This demand indicates that the scope of regulation of airport charges at 
some European airports is too narrow (Niemeier, 2009, see above) and should cover central 
infrastructure.  
Tender process. Member states may limit the number for baggage handling, freight, mail 
handling, ramp handling and fuel and oil handling to a certain number for airports of a certain size. For 
airports with more than 2 m passengers or 50.000 tonnes of cargo the number of third party providers 
may be limited to no fewer than two handling companies of which one of the third party providers 
must be independent from the airport and/or the dominant airline.13 In case the airport operator is also 
providing ground handling an authority must select the limited number of independent suppliers. 
There are several formal infringement procedures by the EC against Member States (e.g. 
Germany, Poland, Malta, Hungary) as these Member States may not have properly adapted the 
Directive especially with regard to the tender procedures, selection of suppliers, markets access 
barriers etc. 
Effective regulation demands that at the very least the regulating authority should be separated 
from the owner and at best from the ministry in order to avoid regulatory capture14. Hence airports 
offering ground handling services and owned by the state or the national airline with a ground 
handling service monopoly should not decide on the tender. It is also unclear how the number of 
possible content is decided on the basis of transparent criteria. The following table summarizes how 
certain member states have established authorities for ground handling tenders. France and Germany 
have not separated the functions of regulation and ownership. In Germany the Oberste 
Luftfahrtbehörden decide on the tender, but either within the ministry or in a different ministry the 
political representative sits on the board of the airport and may give the ground handling company a 
competitive edge. Only in Austria the regulator is independent, but on a limited scale. Given this 
institutional setting which invites regulatory capture the claims of independent ground handling 
providers are plausible. They argue that “the final selection seems not to be comprehensible and in 
some cases politically inspired” (Airport Research Center, 2009, p.132).  
 
22  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
Table 3.  Regulation at selected EU airports with tender for ground handling 
Country Deregulation Regulation 
Austria Market share of partially privatised Vienna 
airport decreased from 100% to 93 % in 1996 to 
93 in2002 to 89 % in 2007.   
DOT decides on tender. DOT 
is separated from owner 
Belgium Airport and Brussels Airline do not offer ground 
handling. Belgian law allows currently only for 2 
handlers but is under revision (Avia Partner, 
Flight Care former Sabena Handling) and two 
self handlers (American Airlines).  
DOT. No regulatory conflict 
as airport and airline do not 
offer services  
France ADP offers ground handling. AF self and third 
party handling. Penauille Serviscair is third part 
provider, but there are different limitations 
varying from terminal to terminal between two 
and three handlers. Market shares in 2004: AF 65 
%, 13 % ADP, Serviscair 13 %, Others 8 %. 
Regulatory conflict as DOT is 
part government with majority 
stake in ADP and a minority 
share in AF/KLM 
Germany All airports offer ground handling except Berlin 
airport and have a dominant position. The major 
shifts recently happened in Hamburg (0% share 
of independent handler); Düsseldorf up to 30% 
for independent handler and Munic up to 
increasing 11 % for independent.  
Regulatory conflict as the 
respective 
Landesluftfahrtbehörde is part 
of government which has at 
least a majority share in 
airport 
Greece Olympic Airways has monopoly at airports less 
than 2 Mio passengers. Partially privatised 
Athens airport offers no services and has opened 
the market through tender processes  
Regulatory conflict as 
Olympic Airways is state 
owned and Athens majority 
owned 
Portugal No detailed information available Portugese Civile Aciation 
Adminstration is not an 
independent body 
Spain Tender process has increased competition and at 
some major airports 3 handlers have been 
allowed market access, whereas at most of the 
airports market access is limited still to two 
handlers. IBERIA with 21 has lost its dominant 
position as licences increased from 33 to 55. At 
Madrid IBERIA has one out of 8 licenses. 
AENA is supposed to be 
independent, but has opened 
up the market 
Sources: ARC (2009), Beyer (2010), Cross (2007) Lufthansa, Templin (2006), 
 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 23 
Slots 
Adopting a slot allocation system to ration demand raises two regulatory institutional questions 
namely 
• How independent is the slot coordinator? 
• And who sets slot limit? 
In France the importance of the discretionary power of slot coordinators became important a 
couple of years ago (for an overview on other countries see table below). Since 1995 slots at Paris 
Charles de Gaulle (level 3), Orly (level 3), Lyon (level 3) and Nice (Level 2) have been coordinated by 
COHOR. COHOR is an independent coordinator but the organization has been subject to heavy 
criticism by Virgin Express15 and EasyJet with regard to its information policy, the treatment of Low 
Cost Carriers and alleged preferential treatment of Air France. However, easyJet failed to prove these 
complaints in the European Court of Justice (2006). Nevertheless some doubts remain in particular 
because COHOR is not independent, but financed by its members. Any airport or airline can become a 
member, but the board of directors, which elects the coordinator, is appointed only by the founding 
members. No further complaints have been raised against the French or against any other European 
slot coordinator. Nevertheless the current institutional organization leaves some doubt about its 
effectiveness because the IATA guidelines for independency of slot coordinators (see below) have not 
worked well in the case of COHOR. Nevertheless the IATA guidelines can be interpreted as an 
attempt to change the old system where slot coordinators cooperate the dominant airline in the 
country. How much this attempt has achieved must be left open for further research. 
 
24  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
Table 4.  Independence of Slot Coordinator 
 
 Best Practice 
 
Functional Independence 
Best Practice 
 
Financial Independence 
   
3 The company employing the staff should be the 
coordination entity 
Multiple parties representing various 
stakeholders share funding of the 
coordination entity 
3 An alternative employment arrangement is a clear 
secondment contract to the coordination entity 
Single till’ approach which allows some 
internal cross subsidy in the coordination 
entity 
3 Financial stakeholders review budget only Not for profit organization (cost recovery 
primarily but allow for ICAO principle of 
reasonable margin) 
3 The Board of the coordination entity cannot influence 
coordination decisions 
Revenue generation acceptable but must 
not affect the functional independence 
3 Separation of physical location or independent office 
facilities 
Secondments from stakeholder 
organizations are acceptable but financial 
control of coordination staff through pay 
must not be in the hands of stakeholders 
3 Separation of coordination software systems and 
schedule data from other stakeholders e.g. airlines 
or airports 
 
3 The coordinator must conduct business in an 
independent manner 
 
3 No conflict of coordination role with other activities  
3 No single stakeholder holds a majority interest  
3 All stakeholders should be consulted in the 
appointment of a coordination entity 
 
3 Separation of coordination role from sanctions role in 
order to maintain a ‘balance of power’ 
 
3 Free from external direction  
   
 Poor Practice Poor Practice 
× Active employees of interested stakeholders are 
responsible for coordination (governments, airports, 
airlines) 
One party fully funds coordination 
× Dual role (coordinator/airline scheduler) Coordination is subsidized by an interested 
party 
 
Source: IATA (2010). 
 
The importance of setting slot limits becomes obvious in a recent comparison between the US 
and Europe based on the 34 busiest airports in 2007 to 2008. Odoni and Morisset (2010, p. 1) 
summarises it as follows: “In general, US airports achieve higher capacities, in terms of aircraft 
movements, than their European counterparts by using visual separation procedures when weather 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 25 
permits and by not placing slot constraints on the number of movements that can be scheduled at 
airports. European airports, on the other hand, limit air traffic delays and increase schedule 
predictability by using slot controls and by determining the number of available slots with reference to 
airport capacities under instrument meteorological conditions”. The difference is not so much a 
technical one but signals two different ways to allocate scare resources (see below figure).  
 
Figure 5.  Model of EU and US slot constrained airport 
Output
Price
D
MCUS ACUS MCEU ACEU
Popt
Qopt
E
QEU
B
A
D
C
AB   Slot rent in EU
CD   Slot rent in US
E      Optimum
QUS
 
 
In the US the constraint is set more to the right (point Qus) and by relying on queuing selects the 
upper congestion function (MCUS) while Europe sets a stricter constraint (QEU) and selects the lower 
congestion function (MCEU). Ceteris paribus the slot rent reaped by airlines in the US (line DC) is 
lower than in Europe (line AB). This result depends both on the rationing device and the slot 
constrain. Rationing by coordination substantially reduces congestion, although the current system 
does not give the slot to the user with the highest willingness to pay16. Ideally the slot constraint 
should be set at a point (E) at which the marginal benefit (slot price) equals the marginal congestion 
cost (Forsyth and Niemeier, 2008). Most probably neither the US DOT nor the DOT of each European 
member state set the slot constraint at an optimal level. A reform of the system would also have to 
address the question which authority should set the constraint. Profit maximizing airlines have an 
interest in low congestion costs and reaping high slot rents. Profits maximizing unregulated airports 
with market power have an interest to limit output and reap scarcity and monopoly rents. Both 
stakeholders might not be the ones who should determine capacity. The question then is whether the 
DOT is independent from both stakeholders to make the welfare maximizing choice. This presupposes 
also knowledge and expertise. The current practise in Europe lacks an economic approach and is more 
driven by an engineering approach to determine technical and operational capacity of certain qualities. 
Therefore it might be better to shift the responsibility to the slot coordinator or to the airport regulator, 
but if and only if these institutions are truly independent. 
26  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
ATC 
Commercialisation and public private partnerships have raised hopes for stronger incentives 
towards cost efficiency but also concerns regarding the abuse of market power. Also public ATC 
systems face principal and agent problems. Delays, pricing and investment decisions become 
increasingly important. Some airlines have acquired a share in their national ATC. This puts even 
more weight on the question 
• How independent is the regulator of ATC? 
The table below provides an overview of selected ATSs. While historically ATS were organized 
as a state department an increasing number of countries have moved away from this form. The 
exception is the US which, rather late in 2005, formed the Air Traffic Organization (ATO) an 
organization within the Federal Aviation Administration. According to Oster and Strong (2007) the 
ATO suffers from organizational independency, lack of accountability and a disconnection between 
cost and revenues drivers. The ATO is financed through excise and general taxes while other countries 
rely on user charges. Most countries have separated management from regulation in some form. The 
EU Parliament (2004) has asked its members to separate these functions in a bid to develop a Single 
European Sky: “The national supervisory authorities shall be independent of air navigation service 
providers. This independence shall be achieved through adequate separation, at the functional level at 
least, between the national supervisory authorities and such providers. Member States shall ensure 
that national supervisory authorities exercise their powers impartially and transparently. (Article 4)” 
The separation creates problems for EUOCONTROL, which provides ATC services and assists the 
European Community in regulating ATC services. Oster and Strong (2007) criticize the dual role of 
Eurocontrol in the inevitable consolidation of a fragmented European airspace: “The consolidation 
may well lead to competition among ANSPs to seek which will take on more airspace and which will 
take on less. In such a world, the ANSPs view EUOCONTROL as a competitor but one whose ability 
to shape regulation gives it an enormous, and arguably unfair, advantage” (p. 68).  
A unambiguous separation has been adopted in the UK. The partial privatisation of NATS with a 
minority share for a consortium of airlines was combined with a reform of regulation along the lines of 
British public utility price cap regulation. NATS is regulated by the CAA. This form of governance 
was also discussed in Germany in 2005. The German provider Deutsche Flug Sicherung (DFS), a 
limited cooperation fully owned by the federal state, was planned to be privatised and price capped in 
2005/6 and a consortium of airlines was planning to bid for a substantial share of it. However, the 
privatisation law was not signed by the German President for legal reasons. Since then privatisation 
has been postponed although the management and the airlines are lobbying for it. In 2009 a new 
regulatory authority was implemented in accordance with the EU directive. The “Bundesaufsichtsamt 
für Flugsicherung” is a separate regulator, but not as independent from the DOT as the CAA (BGBL, 
2009).  
Australia and Ireland have also organized their ATC as a government owned corporation and 
have given the regulator a more independent status. Independency is clearly missing in France. The 
DNSNA is an autonomous entity and regulated by the DGAC, the French civil aviation authority, 
which belongs to the DOT. 
 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 27 
Table 5.  Governance of selected air navigation service providers 
Country ATC Name Ownership Regulator 
Australia Airservices Australia Government 
corporation 
Commission oversight 
Canada NAV CANADA Not-for-profit private 
corporation 
Legislated 
principles/appeals 
France Direction des services de 
la navigation Aérienne 
(DSNA) 
State department DGAC (French CAA) 
Approved by transport 
ministry 
Germany Deutsche Flugsicherung 
GmbH (DFS) 
Government 
corporation 
Bundesaufsichtsamtes für 
Flugsicherung (BAFG) 
Ireland Irish Aviation Authority Government 
corporation 
Regulatory commission 
Netherlands Luchtverkeersleiding 
Nederland (LVNL 
Not-for-profit 
government 
corporation 
Approved by transport 
ministry 
New Zealand Airways Corporation of 
New Zealand 
Corporation Self-regulating/appeals 
South Africa Air Traffic and 
Navigation Services Ltd. 
Not-for-profit joint-
stock corporation 
Transport ministry 
committee 
Switzerland Skyguide Not-for-profit 
government 
corporation 
Approved by transport 
ministry 
United Kingdom National Air traffic 
System, Ltd. 
Public/private 
partnership 
Civil Aviation Authority 
Independent regulator 
United States FAA’s Air Traffic 
Organization 
State department Financing from taxation 
 
Source: Based on Button and Dougall, 2006. Updated from various ATC websites. 
 
Other countries restrict the profit maximizing behaviour of their ATCs. This is the case in Canada 
where a club of airlines owns and manages ATC, as is the case in the Netherlands, Switzerland and 
South Africa. These countries aim at combining private management styles, but want to limit profit 
28  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
maximizing motives by applying for example the non-for-profit principle. Interestingly this mix of 
motives can also be found in the privatisation of NATS. “The choice of the Airline Group had other 
advantages. It has presented its bid as being on a ‘not for commercial return’ basis.” (UK House of 
Commons 2002 as quoted in Steuer, 2010, p 29). The objective of non commercial returns in itself 
does not eliminate the need for regulation. This is so because ATRS provider might still have 
incentives to discriminate among its users especially if a larges number of users is not represented in 
the group of share holders. In the case of NATS the CAA (2004) pointed out that the principle of not 
for profit making was not part of the contract and therefore not binding. The CAA concluded that “in 
itself, this is not a basis for treating NATS differently from any other regulated company” (ibid, p. 13). 
Giving a group of ATC users a share in ownership is akin to vertical integration. This might have 
positive and negative effects, which largely depend on what extend the interest of the share holders 
approximate the interests of the users as a whole. In case of NATS BAA is representing the interests 
of airports and a group of 8 airlines presents roughly 30 per cent of all airlines. The danger might be 
that users are discriminating against each other through the fee structure (although this is limited by 
the legal framework of EUROCONTROL which might also be discriminating) and by providing a 
sub- optimal trade off between cost and services. As the average cost of ATC services is in the range 
of 5 per cent of an airlines operating costs, service quality in terms of delays becomes relatively more 
important. Compared to a profit maximizing unregulated ATC provider NATS might provide a service 
quality with less delays. It might be a different way to internalize delay costs. However, regulation and 
ownership by users are going in the same direction as both prevent the management from providing 
too lower quality. Therefore the CAA concluded that ownership structure of NATS “should be a 
positive force for users as a whole in setting the direction of NATS, but there is a need for these 
arrangements to be buttressed by effective regulation to help ensure a sharp focus on users’ 
concerns.” (CAA, 2004, p.12) 
Overall, while there is a general trend to commercialise ATC services and to separate 
management from regulation only a few countries have given the regulator the necessary 
independence to achieve truly effective regulation. 
4.  SUMMARY: REFORM OF REGULATORY INSTITUTIONS  
The analysis of the regulatory intervention in the value chain of air transport has shown a large 
variety of governance models with effective regulatory institutions. However the analysis found also 
that some regulatory institutions were allowing for both regulatory capture and mismanagement. From 
review a picture of best practice and a blue print for regulatory reform emerges (see table below). 
 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 29 
Table 6.  Overview on regulatory institutional reform of air transport 
 Regulatory reform Country 
Air Service Agreements First option Full liberalization. 
Second option ASA by DOT 
and designation be independent 
commission  
Australia 
Airports Independent regulator for 
airports with market power. 
Designation of airports by DOT 
or commission 
UK, Ireland 
Ground handling First option Full liberalization. 
Second option central 
infrastructure charge regulated 
by airport regulator and tender 
by independent airport or 
independent regulator  
Denmark, Ireland, Netherlands, 
Sweden UK 
Slot allocation Independent slot coordinator 
with independent regulator on 
slot constraint 
Australia 
ATC Independent regulator UK 
 
Countries with an Anglo-Saxon tradition have led the way towards regulatory reform. The UK 
has privatised its public utilities in the 1980’s and 90’s. It had to develop quickly regulation preventing 
monopolies from exploiting consumers and encouraging private investment into assets with sunk costs 
characteristics. Other countries have been more reluctant to reform regulation of air transport: 
• Australia has an excellent system in allocating capacity determined by negotiations on air 
service agreements. The system could be improved if Australia adopts the first best option, 
namely full liberalization. In this respect it seems that Australia is less liberal than for 
example the US.  
• The UK model of airport regulation and regulation of public utilities can serve as a blue print 
in the design of effective regulatory institutions in other countries.  . The UK approach is not 
perfect and might be heavy handed, but at the very least independency of the regulator is 
guaranteed. Ground handling is a market that should be fully liberalized throughout EU 
countries. The tendency towards full liberalization should be enforced by the EU Com, but it 
faces resistance from countries like France and Germany where the airport regulator lacks 
independency. Regulatory capture leads to regulatory failure in the regulation of airports and 
in the access regulation to ground handling. Both effects are leading to substantial welfare 
losses: German airport regulation is cost based for partially liberalized airports, which sets 
incentives for high costs and gold plating (e.g. waste of resources and provision of excessive  
30  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
quality). French airport regulation of partially privatised ADP airports is incentives based, 
but on a low scale. In both countries ground handling prices have not fallen as much as in 
comparable liberalized markets.  
• The French and German airport regulatory systems do not set incentives for allocative 
efficient price structures. A point they have in common with most other European systems. 
Allocation is done by slot allocation consisting of the government decisions on the number 
of coordinated movements and the distribution of slots by slot coordinators. The system has 
lead to lower congestion than the US system of queuing, but could be improved if the slot 
constrain were determined independently to optimal levels and slots were allocated through 
secondary trading. Such a system should be organized by an independent institution. Unlike 
past experience, no complains regarding independency of slot coordinators have been raised 
lately. However national slot coordinators could be easily given a more independent role. 
• The role of an independent regulator for ATC will become more urgent if the general trend 
to commercialise ATC services and to separate management from regulation gains 
momentum. So far only a few countries have given the regulator the necessary independent 
role to achieve effective regulation. 
Environmental and safety regulation is not covered in this analysis. The former might lead to 
blockade of infrastructure expansions and high congestion costs. The latter might lead to high safety 
fees and longer travelling times. These are important problems for further research in particular 
because such interdependencies might only be effectively addressed if regulators are also more 
integrated in the state’s governance by providing his knowledge and information (see Bartle and Vass, 
2007) 
The current regulatory institutions are far from being effective enough to increase economic 
welfare. This is the case for models in which air transport is organised as a mixed public utility with 
elements of competition for air transport services, public ownership and regulation for infrastructure 
on the one hand and for models which rely on private public ownerships on the other. Both models 
could be organized more effectively if ownership and regulation of monopolistic bottlenecks were 
clearly separated, because independent regulators provide long term commitment for immobile and 
specialised investment. The greatest tensions are created when downstream markets are liberalized and 
while the upstream infrastructure market remains regulated by dependent regulators especially if the 
functions of ownership and regulation are not clearly separated. This opens the door to regulatory 
capture. Even if regulators with a strong sense of public duty and inspired to work in the public 
interest are not captured, conflicts are created between the regulated firm and its users so that investors 
will demand safeguards against regulatory risks. Dependent regulators raise barriers to private 
investments in airports and ATC. Continental Europe has with a few exceptions only dependent 
regulators and typically partially privatised airports with minority private shareholdings. This weakens 
the incentives for cost and allocative efficiency in the short run, but in the long run it prevents the 
spreading of competition and therefore possible positive long-run competitive effects. Some parts of 
the value chain of air transport (e.g. ATC) are unlikely going to be subjected to effective competition. 
However some other elements of the value chain might, through growing demand and other technical 
changes (e.g. reduction of time and costs of alternative modes of transport), be subjected to effective 
competition. If and to what extend this potential can be realised depends largely on the ability attract 
private capital and entrepreneurship. Dependent regulators might effectively prevent competition by 
turning former natural monopolies into legal ones and by access discrimination. The latter is 
happening in ground handling at a number of large European airports (e.g. ADP and Fraport). The full 
price for such inefficiencies is difficult to detect. There is evidence of inefficiencies at airports, ground 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 31 
handling, slot allocation, ATC and also in airlines (Button, 2010, Oum, et. al., 2006, Winston and de 
Rus, 2008). But these estimates are largely based on the status quo operating in markets which have 
fully explored the potential of efficiently organizing this industry. The full costs of inefficiency will 
become obvious if one imagines air transport to be organized as a well-functioning supply chain in a 
competitive industry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
I am grateful to Nicole Adler, Martin Dresner, Peter Forsyth, David Gillen, Jörg-Stefan Fritz, 
Alexander Holzrichter, Paul Hooper, Jürgen Müller, Tae Oum, Brian Pearce, Ralf Schikorr, Cornelia 
Templin, Mike Tretheway, Claus Ulrich, and Hartmut Wolf for provision of valuable information on 
regulatory details and of extensive comments on earlier drafts of the paper. I am indebted for excellent 
research assistance to Janetta Carlucci, Karsten Fröhlich, Julia Hellmers, Adele Nemeth and Eric 
Njoya. The research builds on data and analysis of the research project GAB (German Aviation 
Benchmarking) supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research. The responsibility for 
any remaining shortcomings remains the author’s 
 
32  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
 
NOTES 
 
1. National Air Transport Services, UK’s ATC.  
2. For the case of multiproduct firm the condition is changed to a sub additive cost function 
(Baumol et.al. 1997).  
3. The following principles follow from the recommendations of the OECD in 1995: “Good 
regulation should: i) serve clearly identified policy goals, and be effective in achieving those 
goals; (ii) have a sound legal and empirical basis; (iii) produce benefits that justify costs, 
considering the distribution of effects across society and taking economic, environmental and 
social effects into account; (iv) minimise costs and market distortions; (v) promote innovation 
through market incentives and goal-based approaches; (vi) be clear, simple, and practical for 
users; (vii) be consistent with other regulations and policies; and (viii) be compatible as far as 
possible with competition, trade and investment-facilitating principles at domestic and 
international levels.” (OECD, 2005) 
4. See the publications of the Better Regulation Task Force, in particular on the role of independent 
regulators. Better Regulation Task Force, 2003) 
5. See APEC-OECD (2008) 
6. In addition, liberalization led to increases in service provision and growth in number of markets 
served. The contribution to economic growth and tourism has also been large. 
7. above twenty four thousand five hundred feet. 
8. However, note that a lot of empirical questions are to be resolved as there is evidence of both 
increasing and decreasing returns. These studies are based on data collected on established ATC 
centers, which have been created by history not optimization. An economic interesting and highly 
political question concerns the optimally sized ATC area (Gillen, 2010) 
9. All users will benefit from a lower price level due to cost reductions, but only some will benefit 
from higher peak and lower off peak prices.   
10. Aéroports de Paris (ADP) owns Charles De Gaulle and Orly. It faces only mild competition from 
Beauvais Airport, situated 84 km in the north of Paris. Although the passenger numbers have 
risen dramatically, it is still marginal (2000: 0,38; 2005: 1,8; 2007: 2,2 millions) ADP- airports 
(2000: 73,5; 2005: 78,7; 2007 86 millions). Hub competition for Charles De Gaulle has been 
reduced by an alliance with Schiphol. Heathrow and Frankfurt have excess demand. There is 
some competition from other modes. The TGV is an important competitor for regional air 
transport and for the Paris London route (Forsyth et al. 2009). 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 33 
 
 
11. Russel Balding (CEO of Sydney Airport) is reported to say ”We look forward to welcoming 
AirAsia X. Fundamentally, airlines should be able to fly where passengers want them to go 
(Streetcorner, 2010). 
12. The Governor-General is the representative of the Australian monarch (Elizabeth II). He or she 
exercises the supreme executive power, but acts only on the advice of the prime minister or other 
ministers. 
13. Airlines with more than a share of 25 per cent of passengers. 
14. In such a case the EU directive demands that the decision should be taken by “competent 
authorities of the Member States which are independent of the managing body of the airport 
concerned, and which shall first consult the Airport Users' Committee and that managing body” 
Art. 11 
15. Commercial Director Sies comments: "It was a joke. First, we put in an offer to take over part of 
Air Lib's assets and staff to get slots-as the government had indicated-but then COHOR decided 
not to take the argument into account. Then Virgin Express, acting independently, was allocated a 
set of slots which were, for the majority, absolutely useless, at least for the economics of an LCC. 
With the slots that were allocated to us we would achieve a daily aircraft utilization of around 
seven hours while we target 11. Also, in order to use the morning slots to Rome we would have 
to station an aircraft overnight, which was, needless to say, not our idea of establishing a base in 
Orly." (Paylor, 2004, p.2). 
16. Slots are traded in the UK and the market is regards as working fairly well. Elsewhere a grey 
market for slots does not exist. 
34  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
 
REFERENCES 
Airport Research Center (ARC) (2009), Study on the Impact of Directive 96/67/EC on Ground 
Handling Services 1996-2007, Brussels 
ACCC Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (2010), Evaluating Infrastructure Reforms 
and Regulation: A Review of Methods, ACCC/AER working paper 2 /August 2010, 
www.accc.gov.au 
APEC-OECD (200?), Integrated Checklist on regulatory reform, Paris: Organization  
APEC-OECD Integrated Checklist on Regulatory Reform: A Policy Instrument for Regulatory 
Quality, Competition Policy and Market Openness, APEC and OECD, 
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/3/53/36326815.pdf#search='apec%20oecd%20integrated%20chec
klist 
Baldwin, R. and M. Cave (1999), Understanding Regulation – Theory, Strategy, and Practive, Oxford, 
Oxford University Press 
Bartle, I. and P. Vass (2007), Independent economic regulation: A reassessment of its role in 
sustainable development, Utilities Policy 15, 261 -269 
Beckers, T., J. P. Klatt and J. Kühling (2010), Entgeltregulierung der deutschen Flughäfen, TU-
Berlin, www.wip.tu-berlin.de 
Better Regulation Task Force (2003), Independent Regulators, London: Cabinet Office  
Beyer, L (2010), Analysis of competition structure and its development in the ground handling sector 
on airports in Germany, Seventh Aviation Student Research Workshop” in Amsterdam July 1 
to3, 2010 http://www.garsonline.de/ 
BGBl (2009), Gesetzes zur Errichtung eines Bundesaufsichtsamtes für Flugsicherung und zur 
Änderung und Anpassung weiterer Vorschriften vom 29. Juli 2009 BGBl. 
Bilotkach, V., F. Fichert, H.M. Niemeier, E. Pels, and A. Polk (2010), Study of the economic market 
power on the relevant market(s) for aviation(-related) services on the Amsterdam airport 
Schiphol, Study for the Netherlands Competition Authority, 2010, Den Hague 
Borenstein, S. (1992), “The Evolution of U.S. Airline Competition,” Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 6, 45-73 
Brueckner, J.K. and P.T. Spiller (1994), “Economies of Traffic Density in the Deregulated Airline 
Industry,” Journal of Law and Economics 37, 379-415) 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 35 
Button, K. (2010), Comparative Inefficiencies of various air navigation systems, in P. Forsyth, D. 
Gillen, K. Hüschelrath, H. M. Niemeier and H. Wolf (eds.), Liberalisation in Aviation, Aldershot, 
Ashgate, forthcoming 
Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) (2004), NATS Price Control Review 2006-2010 Review of Responses 
to the CAA’s Initial Consultation Document July 2004, London 
Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) (2007), De-designation of Manchester and Stansted airports for price 
regulation- The CAA's advice to the Secretary of State, www.caa.co.uk 
Competition Commission (2003), Market Investigation References: Competition Commission 
Guidelines, London, www.competition-commission.org.uk 
Competition Commission (2008), BAA airports market investigation, Provisional findings report, 20 
August 2008, London, www.competition-commission.org.uk 
Competition Commission (2009), BAA airports market investigation, A report on the supply of airport 
services by BAA in the UK, 19 March 2009, London www.competition-commission.org.uk 
Caves, D.W., W. Christensen and W.M. Tretheway (1984), “Economies of Density versus Economies 
of Scale: Why Trunk and Local Service Costs Differ,” RAND Journal of Economics 15, 471-489 
Cross, B. (2007), Ground handling opens up, Jane’s Airport Review, May 2007. p . 24 - 25 
European Parliament (2004), Regulation (EC) No 549/2004 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 10 March 2004 laying down the framework for the creation of the single European sky 
European Court of Justice (2006), EeasyJet Airline Co. Ltd gegen Kommission der Europäischen 
Gemeinschaften, Urteil vom 4. 7. 2006 - T-177/ 04, www.Lexetius.com/2006,1357 
Forsyth, P. and H.-M. Niemeier (2008): Setting the Slot Limits at Congested Airport; in A. Czerny, P. 
Forsyth, D. Gillen, H-M. Niemeier (Hrsg.): Airport Slots. International Experiences and Options 
for Reform, German Aviation Research Seminar Series No. 3, Ashgate, Burlington, p. 63- 83 
Forsyth, P, H.-M. Niemeier, J. Müller and H. Wiese (2009), Regulation of ADP Airports – An 
economic Assessment, Paper given at the 13th Air Transport Research Society World Conference 
Abu Dhabi 27 to 30 June2009 
Gillen, D. (2010), Explaining variability in air traffic control costs in the domestic US Working paper 
Centre for Transportation Studies at University of British Columbia, Vancouver 
Gillen, D., H. Hinsch, B. Mandel, and H. Wolf, (2000), The Impact of Liberalizing International 
Aviation Bilaterals on the Northern German Region, Aldershot, Ashgate 
Graham, A. (2008), Managing airports an international perspective, 3rd edition, Amsterdam Elsevier 
International Air Transport Association (IATA) (2010), IATA Worldwide Scheduling Guidelines 
Effective August 2010 20th Edition, Montreal 
International Air Services Commission Act 1992, Attorney-General’s Department, 
Canberra,www.comlaw.gov.au/ComLaw/Legislation/ActCompilation1.nsf 
36  Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 
Initiative Luftverkehr für Deutschland (2007), Hintergrundpapier zur Studie der Initiative 
„Luftverkehr für Deutschland": „Die Expansion der Luftverkehrsinfrastruktur und -kapazitäten 
im Mittleren Osten und ihre Auswirkungen auf den Luftverkehrsstandort Deutschland.“, 
Frankfurt am Main, http://www.initiative-luftverkehr.de/ 
Levy, B. and P. T. Spiller (1994), The Institutional Foundations of Regulatory Commitment: A 
Comparative Analysis of Telecommunications Regulation, Journal of Law, Economics, and 
Organization, 10, pp. 201-246 
Lee, D. editor (2006), Competition Policy and Antitrust, Advances in Airline Economics, Vol. 1 
Amsterdam Elsevier 
Morrison, S.A. (2001), “Actual, Adjacent and Potential Competition: Estimating the Full Effect of 
Southwest Airlines,” Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, 35, 239-256  
Morrison, S. A. (2002) The Evolution of the Airline Industry –before and after September 11th, New 
Directions in Regulation Seminar, www.dac.neu.edu/economics/morrison/research 
Morrison, S.A. and C. Winston (1992), The Evolution of the Airline Industry, Washington, Brookings 
Institution 
Morrison, S. and C. Winston (2008), Delayed! U.S. Aviation Infrastructure Policy at a Crossroads, in 
C. Winston and G. de Rus, eds., Aviation Infrastructure Performance A Study in Comparative 
Political Economy, Washington, Brookings Institution Press pp. 7-35 
Mott Mac Donald (2006), A Study on the Introduction of Secondary Trading at Community Airports 
commissioned by the EU Commission, http://ec.europa.eu/transport 
Odoni, A, and T. Morisset (2010) Performance Comparisons between Us and European Airports, 
Paper given at the 12th WCTR, July 11-15, 2010 – Lisbon, Portugal 
OECD (1997), Report on Regulatory Reform, Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development 
OECD, (2005) OECD Guiding Principles for regulatory quality and performance, Paris: Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development 
Productivity Commission Australia (2002), Price Regulation of Airport Services, Report No. 19, 
Canberra 
Oster, C.V. Jr. and Strong, J.S. (2008) Managing the Skies: Public Policy, Organization, and Financing 
of Air Navigation, Aldershot, Ashgate 
Oum, T.H., Adler, N. and Yu, C. (2006). Privatization, corporatization, ownership forms and their 
effects on the performance of the world's major airports, Journal of Air Transport Management 
12 (3), pp. 109-211 
Paylor, A. (2004), The Slots Game, Air Transport World, August 2004, 
http://www.atwonline.com/magazine 
Niemeier — Discussion Paper 2010-20 — © OECD/ITF, 2010 37 
Stern, J (1997) What Makes an Independent Regulator Independent? Business Strategy Review, 
Volume 8, Issue 2, June 1997, Pages: 67–74 
Stern, I. and S. Holders (1999), Regulatory Governance: Criteria for assessing the performance of 
regulatory systems, NERA 1999 London 
Schulte, S. (2009), Financing Airport Infrastructure – the Fraport Perspective, paper for the 
International Transport Forum 2009, 26-29 May 2009, Leipzig 
Stigler, G. (1971), The Theory of Economic Regulation, Bell Journal of Economics 2 (1), 3-21 
Templin, C. (2010), Competition for Airport Services – Ground handling services in Europe Case 
studies on six major European Hubs, in: P. Forsyth, D. Gillen, J. Müller, H. M. Niemeier (eds.), 
Competition in European Airports, Ashgate, Aldershot pp. 393-412 
Thatcher, M. and A.S. Sweet (2002), Theory and Practice of Delegation to non-majoritarian 
institutions. West European politics, 25 (1). pp. 1-22 
Vass, P. (2006), Regulatory governance and the lessons from UK practice, in M. Crew and d Parker, 
International Handbook on Economic Regulation,  Cheltenham UK: Edward Elgar, pp.188-208 
Verkehrsministerkonferenz [VMK] (2000), Beschluß zur Liberalisierung bilateraler 
Luftverkehrsabkommen und zur Stärkung der Wettbewerbsfähigkeit deutscher Regionen 
innerhalb der EU vom 27/28. September 2000, Frankfurt 
Williamson, O.E. (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. Firms, Markets, relational 
Contracting. New York. 
Winston, C. and G. de Rus (2008), Aviation Infrastructure Performance A Study in Comparative 
Political Economy, Washington, Brookings Institution Press 
Wolf, H. (2003), Privatisierung im Flughafensektor. Eine ordnungspolitische Analyse Berlin, 
Heidelberg, New York, Hongkong; Springer 
Wolf. H. (2004), Airport Privatisation and Regulation: Getting the Institutions Right, in P. Forsyth, D. 
Gillen, A. Knorr, O. Mayer, H. M. Niemeier and D. Starkie (ed.), The Economic Regulation of 
Airports, Aldershot, Ashgate, 2004, pp. 201- 212 
 
 

