P 
O
 L
 I
 C
 Y
  
P 
A 
P 
E 
R
  
S 
E 
R
 I
 E
 S
Forschungsinstitut 
zur Zukunft der Arbeit
Institute for the Study 
of Labor 
IZA Policy Paper No. 52
A Guide to the Political Economy of Reforming
Energy Subsidies
Simon Commander
December 2012
 
 
 
 
A Guide to the Political Economy of 
Reforming Energy Subsidies 
 
 
 
 
Simon Commander 
Altura Partners, EBRD, 
IE Business School and IZA 
 
 
 
 
 
Policy Paper No. 52 
December 2012 
 
 
 
 
IZA 
 
P.O. Box 7240   
53072 Bonn   
Germany   
 
Phone: +49-228-3894-0  
Fax: +49-228-3894-180   
E-mail: iza@iza.org 
 
 
 
 
The IZA Policy Paper Series publishes work by IZA staff and network members with immediate 
relevance for policymakers. Any opinions and views on policy expressed are those of the author(s) 
and not of IZA, which itself takes no institutional policy positions. 
 
The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) in Bonn is a local and virtual international research center 
and a place of communication between science, politics and business. IZA is an independent nonprofit 
organization supported by Deutsche Post Foundation. The center is associated with the University of 
Bonn and offers a stimulating research environment through its international network, workshops and 
conferences, data service, project support, research visits and doctoral program. IZA engages in (i) 
original and internationally competitive research in all fields of labor economics, (ii) development of 
policy concepts, and (iii) dissemination of research results and concepts to the interested public. 
 
The papers often represent preliminary work and are circulated to encourage discussion. Citation of 
such a paper should account for its provisional character. A revised version may be available directly 
from the corresponding author. 
 
 
IZA Policy Paper No. 52 
December 2012 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
A Guide to the Political Economy of Reforming Energy Subsidies* 
 
Energy subsidies are used widely. Although adverse from an efficiency perspective, 
subsidies confer private benefits on particular groups and, once introduced, tend to be 
persistent. This paper examines the reasons why and possible ways of overcoming the 
barriers to reform. The starting point is to look at the motives lying behind the adoption of 
energy subsidies. Distributional motives were found to figure prominently while the role of 
interested parties or lobbies is also common. The paper then looks at the characteristics of 
countries that use energy subsidies. Countries with weak institutions – often non-
democracies – tend to be associated with higher subsidies. The paper then looks at how 
country level conditions and constraints can be identified. An analytical-cum-policy framework 
allowing identification of the key constraints is proposed before turning to the types of policies 
– contingent on institutional capacity – that can address those constraints, such as 
compensating transfers. The paper also indicates how a better understanding of citizens’ 
policy preferences and the trade-offs that are likely to be accepted is essential for designing 
reform. 
 
 
JEL Classification: H20, H23, J65, J68 
 
Keywords: political economy, energy, subsidies, transfers  
 
 
Corresponding author: 
 
Simon Commander 
EBRD 
One Exchange Square 
London EC2A 2JN 
United Kingdom 
E-mail: commanders@ebrd.com  
                                                 
* Thanks to Ruslan Yemtsov, Lucian Pop and Sabine Beddies for discussion and comments. Many 
thanks also to Chiara Amini and Zlatko Nikoloski for help. Harold Alderman, Phil Keefer and Tara 
Viswanath gave useful written comments on an earlier draft. Abdallah Dardari, Joly Dixon and Bassel 
Kaghadou provided very helpful suggestions and comments. 
 2 
1. Introduction 
A wide array of countries now uses energy subsidies1. At a global level, subsidies to both 
consumers and producers amounted to $700 billion in 2008, equivalent to around 1% of 
global GDP2.  In particular regions - notably the Middle East and Maghreb - energy 
subsidies are pervasive and large.  Periods of high and rising prices for fuels – as presently – 
have also tended to lead to the introduction or increase of energy subsidies across a broad 
spectrum of regions and political systems.  
The motives for using subsidies range from temporary income buffering to rent 
capture and/or explicit attempts at sharing national natural resource wealth. A common 
justification has been that subsidies can reduce poverty and enhance access to energy among 
lower income households, particularly in rural areas. However, measurement of subsidies is 
often difficult as they may be channelled through a variety of channels including, but not 
limited to, direct cash transfers, tax reductions and exemptions, price caps, as well as limits 
on market access and cross-subsidies to consumers3. These different channels can, in turn, 
affect the transparency of the subsidy and the political dynamics associated with revising or 
eliminating a subsidy. This paper is concerned largely with the group of consumption 
subsidies, although it is also the case that producers can benefit from subsidies that promote 
domestic exploration, extraction or refining4.  
 One of the principal reasons for why energy subsidies have become a major public 
policy issue is because of their cost. In particular, subsidies have often contributed to levels 
of fiscal deficits that are difficult to sustain. Even if there is a broad consensus that the 
consequences of energy subsidies – fiscal, allocative, distributional and environmental – are 
mostly adverse, this has apparently little affected their deployment, even if the scale and 
incidence differ widely across country, region and energy source5.  A further feature of 
                                                 
1 Nikoloski (2011) is a companion paper containing detailed country narratives on energy subsidies and policy. 
2 See G20 Report (2010). Consumer subsidies accounted for roughly 80% of total subsidies. Note that this 
excludes subsidies to non-fossil fuel energy sources and does not account for taxes on energy users. Subsidies 
fell back to around $420 billion in 2009, see also GSI (2011). 
3 World Bank (2010) has a detailed discussion of the measurement of subsidies. 
4 GSI (2011) lists the types of producer subsidies. 
5 Subsidies are not limited to price interventions but are often delivered through a wide range of channels. 
Thus, non-collection of bills and outright theft can be significant. For example, data for some African countries 
has shown that these accounted for over 50% of total hidden costs in the power sector. 
 3 
energy subsidies is that once introduced they tend to be difficult to roll back and hence 
become persistent6.   
This paper meshes together an analytical and empirical approach with a strong policy 
focus. It draws on a wide range of country examples to help understand not only why energy 
subsidies have arisen and are implemented but also why they persist and are seemingly so 
resistant to reform. The paper has the specific objective of being useful for those involved in 
the reform of energy subsidies. As such, it starts from the assumption that energy subsidies 
can best be understood through a political economy perspective where political institutions 
and, sometimes, systems not only affect the choice of the particular policy instrument but 
also affect the feasibility of reform or subsequent changes to policy. Because of this focus, as 
well as the large variation in motivation and implementation of energy subsidies across 
country, no attempt is made to model explicitly any of these regimes or institutional 
configurations. What is done instead is to build up a set of possible motivations for subsidy 
use and retention using a wide range of information on countries, institutions and other 
economic data. Once a simple typology has been established, the paper then turns to how 
the reform of energy subsidies can be orchestrated and implemented in these multiple 
settings given their associated constraints.  As will become clear, different institutional 
settings and constraints can motivate very different paths to reform.   
 
2. Regional profile of energy subsidies  
Figure 1 shows the evolution of two benchmark energy prices – oil and gas - over the last 
decade. Energy prices have clearly been volatile and there has been strong upward drift, even 
if both price levels presently stand below their 2008 peak.  Periods of price acceleration have 
widely seen the adoption or extension of subsidies to consumers, sometimes in direct 
response to political unrest or protest.  For example, in Asia between 2008 and 2010 over 
half of countries have passed on less than 75% of the increase in international prices for 
petrol and diesel to consumers. In short, the cost of energy subsidies – particularly fuel – has 
assumed very substantial proportions, posing a significant fiscal risk. For large oil importers, 
the burden can be particularly severe. In the case of India – which imports over 70% of its 
                                                 
6 Note that the emphasis in this paper is on transfers that support energy consumption primarily through 
pricing. The paper is also focused primarily on the political economy of subsidies, not on their measurement.  
 4 
total fuel needs - maintaining diesel and petrol prices at 20-35% below international prices in 
2011 implied a total fuel subsidy bill of around 10% of GDP. In the Middle East, an energy 
importing country like Jordan had its fiscal deficit increase by over 1% of GDP in 2011 as a 
result of increased energy subsidies7. 
A sense of how widespread energy subsidies have become is given in Figure 2 which 
uses consistent IEA data for subsidies on oil, gas, coal and electricity for 36 countries 
grouped in regions. The cost of energy subsidies is expressed as a share of GDP for the 
period 2007-20098. Although the IEA sample is biased toward natural resource economies 
(16 out of 35 fit this categorisation) it still provides a good sense of the scale and regional 
distribution. There is not only much variation across, but also within, regions, as well as 
across energy type.  The IEA data can be complemented by that collated by the IMF which 
includes 169 countries for the period from 2002-2008 with coverage for three types of fuel – 
petrol, diesel and kerosene. The subsidy rate for each is calculated by relating domestic end-
of-period prices converted into US dollars to international spot prices. A crude measure of 
the total subsidy on these products relative to GDP has also been calculated using quantity 
data from the IEA9.  
Two regions stand out for their relatively high exposure to energy subsidies using the 
IEA dataset for 2007-2009 – Europe and Central Asia and the Middle East and Maghreb. In 
the latter grouping, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Syria had subsidies of between 8-13% of GDP, 
while in Iran they exceeded 20% by 2009. For the region as a whole, the average subsidy 
approached 10% of GDP. In Europe and Central Asia, subsidies have been centred mainly 
on gas and concentrated in two countries; Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. Other economies 
of the region in the sample, including Russia and Ukraine, have run subsidies at far lower 
levels, in the range of 2 - 5% of GDP. The data also suggest that there is a strong 
association between a country having energy resources and the presence of subsidies. While 
this is to some extent resource specific, producing oil is also positively correlated with 
subsidies for other types of energy, suggesting a wider pathology. However, a significant 
                                                 
7 See IMF, Regional Economic Outlook, April, 2011 
8 IEA 2009 provides detailed information on measurement.  
9 The estimate is very approximate insofar as annual consumption data with end-of period prices are used. 
 5 
number of countries that run large energy subsidies actually have small or non-existent 
energy resources. 
Energy subsidies - as measured by the IMF dataset - show a similar picture for the 
longer period from 2002-2008. In the case of diesel and kerosene, 35-36/169 countries had 
domestic prices below border prices over the period, with 17 countries having petrol below 
border prices.  The Middle East and North Africa stands out for its relatively low diesel and 
kerosene price ratios. For the latter, we also find that prices in much of Asia have been lower 
than border prices. Annual observations also indicate significant variation across years. Figure 
3 uses the very approximate fuel subsidies to GDP ratio that have been calculated. There is 
significant regional variation with the Middle East again having clearly the largest exposure 
to subsidies. There is also significant variation within these regional groups.  For example, 
countries such as Iran and Iraq have spent between 10-15% of GDP over the period on 
these three fuels, while Egypt, Libya, Syria and Yemen have spent between 4-5%.10. 
In terms of spending per head of population, the regional picture looks rather 
different. In the IEA dataset, spending per capita in the Middle East and North Africa is far 
larger than spending in the other regions. In Europe and Central Asia spending is particularly 
high on gas, while in the Middle East subsidies are significant for all sources bar coal. In the 
case of the IMF data that region is again the largest with notably high per capita spending on 
kerosene. However, spending per capita on diesel and gasoline in Europe and Latin America 
is also substantial. Finally, when considered in terms of the level of spending, between 2007 
and 2009 Chinese and Indian energy subsidies amounted to $27-$29 billion, respectively. 
Although small as a share of GDP, this level of subsidy spending was a third higher than 
Egypt but roughly 30% below the Saudi Arabian level.  
Although consistent time series data are not available post-2009, subsidies appear to 
have increased again after 2010/2011 as oil prices, in particular, shifted upwards. For 
example, in Egypt the cost of fuel subsidies increased by over 30% since 200911, while more 
                                                 
10 Comparing the information for the overlapping years (2007-2008) for countries present in both datasets, the 
subsidy/GDP measures are highly correlated For example, the correlation using the broadest measure of 
subsidies for each dataset was 0.5, while using just oil and oil products, the correlation was >0.7.   
11 By 2011 fuel subsidies in Egypt accounted for around 8/9% of GDP with food subsidies accounting for a 
further 2%. As noted by the ‘Economist’ (June 25, 2011, pp62-64) subsidy spending was around three times 
higher than budgetary spending on education. 
 6 
generally in the Middle East, political upheaval has led incumbent governments – such as in 
Jordan, Oman, Syria and Saudi Arabia – to raise fuel subsidies and other transfer 
programmes, not least in the hope of dampening or averting political discontent. More 
widely, developing country governments have tended to slow the rate of increase in energy 
prices, deepen existing subsidy programmes or vary rates of energy or fuel taxation. In Chile, 
for example, the government in 2010 agreed to vary fuel taxes, upward and downward, in 
response to fuel price movements that cross a particular (and relatively high) threshold. 
Other countries have attempted (mostly with limited success) to place energy price setting or 
regulation at a distance from government in, for example, independent authorities12.  
Finally, recent price volatility has renewed calls for deepening programmes of social 
protection. One historical reference has been European experience after 1945 where 
governments provided more social insurance to citizens as a way of dealing with the 
enhanced risk and volatility associated with greater economic openness and integration13. 
 
3. Motivation, instruments and persistence 
Despite the prevalence of subsidies in many countries, the reasons for their use vary across 
country and region. The main motivations include, but are not limited to, the following 
(noting that these are not necessarily exclusive); 
1. Income buffering: in the face of price shocks, including of an external nature and 
particularly when the rate of change in energy prices is large and rapid. Experience 
shows that energy subsidies initiated as notionally temporary income buffers have 
commonly become more permanent and difficult to reform or eliminate. 
2. Lobbying: Principal-agent interactions whereby lobbies – including particular 
industries or companies - succeed in securing specific benefits, such as reduced 
energy costs. Special or vested interests may be able to carve out transfers or rents 
for themselves – thereby concentrating benefits - through lobbying but where the 
                                                 
12 For example, a National Petroleum Agency was set up in Ghana that was intended to be politically 
independent and responsible for administering energy prices. The election cycle subsequently trumped this 
notional independence. In Jordan, petroleum product prices are adjusted using a clear formula on a monthly 
basis by a committee of representatives from different Ministries as well as the refinery company; see Nikoloski 
(2011) 
13 Rodrik (1998) 
 7 
costs of those transfers diffuse through the general population14. Even with 
competitive politics which allows more policy competition, the presence of multiple 
agency and/or common agency, alongside incomplete monitoring, can create space 
for special interests.  Non-democratic regimes also tend to operate by rewarding 
supporters, commonly through devolving control over economic rents to particular, 
privileged groups. In large federal countries, such as India, the devolution of 
decision-making has facilitated the creation of regional or local lobbies as well as 
determining the locus of bargaining15. Policy competition between federal and sub-
federal agencies has also tended to result16. 
3. National patrimony: Allocating revenue flows from natural resources, such as oil or 
gas, as a national patrimony to be shared – mostly asymmetrically - among the 
population17. In a number of non-democracies, this has appeared as some sort of 
income trade-off for political and other liberties and has sometimes been represented 
as a component of a broader social compact18. 
4. Component of industrial policy:  Using energy pricing as a component of 
industrial policy aimed at supporting production in selected sectors or firms deemed 
to have dynamic advantage or to have favoured status due to connections or other 
factors. 
5. Supporting external competitiveness: Increasing or supporting the export 
orientation of an economy and the competitiveness of export-oriented firms through 
the under-pricing of energy inputs, a strategy that has been widely pursued in East 
Asia including China. 
6. Diversifying energy supply: Increasing diversity in energy supply through subsidies 
to specific energy sources, such as Thailand’s subsidies to gas prices and diesel with 
bio-fuel content aimed at reducing its dependence on fossil-fuel imports.  
                                                 
14 An argument propagated by Olson (1965) among others 
15 See Dansie et al (2010) 
16 In India, the federal government influences the price of fuels by capping prices for key products.  Price 
increases – as in 2011 – have often been accompanied by reductions in taxes and duties. However, the federal 
government cannot force state governments to comply, resulting in widely different state-level tax rates. 
17 Perhaps the most extreme case is Saudi Arabia where petrol is priced lower than bottled water and where 
fossil-fuel subsidies account for around 10% of GDP.  
18 As argued for Russia and China in Dansie et al (2010) 
 8 
7. Transfers to the poor: Providing income support to poorer households and/or 
regions and/or raising access to energy for poorer households. These are pervasive 
motivations although the evidence shows that with fuel subsidies, the bottom four 
deciles of the income distribution receive on average no more than 15-20% of the 
total value of those subsidies; testimony to their highly regressive nature19.  
Table 1 uses evidence from detailed country cases to identify the main motivations 
behind the use of energy subsidies20. Clearly, this is not straightforward, as a multiplicity of 
objectives may be present and these may also have changed over time. Despite these caveats, 
it can be seen that poverty and/or equity considerations, as well as the effect of lobbies or 
vested interests, dominate. A significant number of countries have also used energy subsidies 
as a component of industrial policy.  
Table 2 indicates the ways in which energy subsidies tend to be implemented for both 
producer and consumer subsidies. In the former case, the table shows several modalities 
being applied, while in the case of consumer subsidies, a price wedge remains the dominant 
mechanism although use of tax instruments is also quite common. 
Finally, the evidence shows that whatever the motivation and form of delivery, energy 
subsidies tend to be persistent once introduced. Using the IMF dataset which contains 
annual observations between 2002 and 2008, in the case of diesel nearly 40% of countries 
that operated a subsidy in at least one year had subsidies in place for four or more of those 
years21. The share was similar for gasoline while in the case of kerosene it was around 60%.  
 
4. Institutions and capacity 
Behind the various motivations discussed above lie other potential conditioning factors. One 
possible explanation for the use of energy subsidies might be institutional.  Governments 
have recourse to subsidies because they lack other effective levers and/or institutional 
capacity with which to implement policy. For example, a large number of developing 
countries have limited bureaucratic capacity and ability to monitor the formal sector that 
results in a relatively low share of fiscal revenues being raised from income and profit taxes. 
                                                 
19 World Bank, Independent Evaluation Group, 2009 
20 This draws on the country narratives presented in Nikoloski (2011). 
21 For diesel, 17% of countries actually had energy subsidies for either the whole period or for 6 out of 7 years. 
 9 
To explore this broad conjecture, it can be observed whether there is any association 
between measures of institutions and the use of energy subsidies. Several widely used 
datasets are available that measure institutional factors. For example, using the data collected 
by ICRG for a number of indicators - bureaucratic quality, corruption, democratic 
accountability, as well as law and order – where a lower rating implies higher risk - all four 
measures are found to be negatively associated with subsidies to GDP, with the correlation 
being larger for the bureaucratic quality and corruption variables. This association between 
weak institutions and subsidies, when disaggregated by energy type, appears particularly 
strong for oil.  Another set of indicators collected by Kaufmann also measures institutional 
quality across a number of dimensions. Again, there is a clear, negative association between 
subsidies to GDP and a measure of government effectiveness, rule of law, regulatory quality 
and freedom from corruption22. A composite indicator of institutional quality also indicates a 
strong negative correlation (see Figures 4 and 5)23.  In short, these unconditional associations 
suggest that subsidies are associated with weaker institutions or, at least, these measures of 
institutions.  
Institutional frailty, in turns, appears to be associated with the type of political system 
in a country. A simple association between the measure of institutional quality and a measure 
of the political regime indicates that more competitive or democratic regimes tend to score 
better institutionally and this association mostly holds at a regional level (see Figure 6)24. 
Indeed, a large literature has long suggested that authoritarian governments provide fewer 
public goods. This, of course, also makes changing policy problematic – for example, in 
response to exogenous shocks, such as an energy price increase. Absent workable 
mechanisms for dialogue and resolution, commonly combined with weak institutions, non-
democratic regimes have tended to introduce or extend universal energy subsidies, 
sometimes irrespective of the fiscal and other consequences.  
An associated conjecture relates to the fact that non-democratic polities tend also to 
be those with high inequality in both income and wealth distributions. To lower risks of 
upheaval or social turmoil, such governments may choose to often citizens some element of 
                                                 
22 The correlations are in the range of -0.3/0.35. 
23 The measure is put together using principal components.  
24 The measure of political systems that is used is Polity IV where the scoring ranges from -10 (full autocracy) 
to +10 full democracy. Saudi Arabia is scored as -10; while the UK is scored at +10. 
 10 
redistribution. Redistributive policies – such as higher taxes on the better off - are not 
generally credible or are subject to reversal, meaning that autocratic governments have to 
work out how to make a more credible commitment to income redistribution25. One way is 
for the government to commit to some form of income (not asset) transfers to the rest of 
the population. Some circumstantial evidence from focus groups or other qualitative 
interviews in countries with non-democratic regimes has suggested that energy subsidies are 
viewed by citizens as at least providing a tangible – and hence credible - transfer to the 
population26. This is one element of the wider paradox of non-democratic regimes – as they 
do not necessarily know with any precision those in the general population who do or do not 
support them - they have a tendency to rely on general programmes of transfers or income 
support, even if such programmes are highly inefficient.27 
In sum, the difficulty - and sometimes inability – to resolve the latent 
disputes/distributional conflicts that arise when faced with an external shock, such as an 
energy price change, can combine with the wider presence of frail institutions to result in 
governments relying on policy instruments such as energy subsidies28. 
 
5. Accounting for persistence in energy subsidies 
Once adopted energy subsidies persist and have widely been proven to be hard to reform29. 
This simple characterisation appears to hold irrespective of the political system under which 
subsidies are dispensed although, there are both theoretical and practical reasons for why 
autocracies may find reform more difficult. There are few examples of countries successfully 
and sustainably introducing significant reforms or eliminating subsidies. Rather, country 
narratives are littered with examples of piecemeal, often reversed, attempts at reform. The 
reasons behind this are complex and obviously contain many country specifics, but some 
general features also stand out. While loss of economic rents by affected parties – whether 
companies, individuals or households - may be a significant factor in determining opposition 
                                                 
25 See Acemoglu and Robinson (2000) 
26 Examples come from Morocco and Egypt. 
27 It has been argued that subsidies may crowd out social spending and result in an inefficient allocation of 
public spending. This conjecture is difficult to test given inadequacies in the measurement of social spending in 
most developing countries. 
28 In a wider context, see Rodrik (2007) and also Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) 
29 See Nikoloski (2011). 
 11 
to reform, a political dimension may also be important, for example, when reform is likely to 
induce a shift in the distribution of political power. That sort of shift may occur simply by 
reducing the scope for politicians and/or political parties to hand out rents, or it may affect 
the ability of recipients to fund political parties that in turn provide them with preferential 
treatment30. However complex, the appropriate focus for analysis will be of a comparative 
institutional nature, looking in particular at how these constraints affect the way in which the 
key players interact and the associated outcomes. This is indeed the approach that will be 
taken in Section 6 below. Before that, this section concentrates on a set of possible 
explanatory factors for why energy subsidies are so difficult to change. 
 
5.1 Uncertainty 
In addressing the wider issue of why governments fail to adopt efficiency improving reforms 
– such as reducing or eliminating energy subsidies – one emphasis has been on the 
uncertainty regarding the distribution of gains and losses from reform31. A bias against 
reform could exist if some of the individual gainers and losers from reform cannot be 
identified ex ante, even if reforms prove popular ex post.  The presence of individual-specific 
uncertainty can distort aggregate preferences. The assumption here is that if no reform 
occurs and the status quo is maintained, no new information will be made available about the 
distribution of losers and gainers. However, if a reform does get passed and then proves to 
be unpopular, more information is made available. In a competitive political environment 
this should allow voters to reverse that reform by voting in another government and/or 
policy. An extension of this insight is that gradualism is likely to be a more credible strategy 
in a democratic set-up precisely because of this ability to revise. For non-democratic regimes 
a status quo bias may be more likely due to the absence of political mechanisms for reducing 
uncertainty about outcomes and/or revising choices. These factors may combine to impair 
the credibility, let alone feasibility, of policy announcements linked to the reform of 
subsidies.  
 
 
                                                 
30 See Acemoglu and Robinson (2000) 
31 Fernandez and Rodrik(1991). 
 12 
5.2 Information 
An associated consideration concerns the availability of information. Most generally, voters 
may have limited information about policies or people associated with particular policies and 
this may drive a wedge between formal and real accountability32. Governments may similarly 
frame policies without full understanding of voters’ preferences. And – of clear relevance to 
the matter of energy subsidies – citizens may (and often do) have very incomplete or 
inaccurate information regarding what they or others receive in terms of subsidies, as also 
the content of policies with regard to subsidies, let alone the composition of total cost33. For 
example, survey and focus group evidence collected in Morocco in 2010 showed that in the 
case of the butane gas subsidy, a majority of households were actually unaware that any 
subsidy was in place34. In addition, there was a very significant under-estimation – across all 
social classes - of the scale of subsidy for the product. Moreover, while a removal of the 
subsidy on butane gas would have implied raising retail prices by two and a half times, 
respondents on average believed that a non-subsidised price would increase by less than 
40%.     
It seems likely that these sorts of mis-perceptions spread far wider than this one 
instance. It signals the need for clear explanation of what are the costs of subsidies, as well as 
the distribution of benefits, to citizens and affected parties. This element of public 
communication is returned to in more depth in Section 6 below. 
 
5.3 Income traps 
Persistence can also be traced to employment and compensation regimes and the problem of 
income traps, in particular. For instance, in parts of the Middle East and North Africa, 
public sector employment is often large. At the same time, monetary compensation has been 
set to be consistent with this employment level and the government’s budget constraint, 
resulting in low levels of wages.  Further, public sector wages often serve as the effective 
                                                 
32 A point made by Besley (2004). 
33 For example, in Central and Eastern Europe non-transparent components, such as collection failures and 
unaccounted losses have been important parts of the total subsidy on electricity, amounting in Serbia to around 
2% of GDP. 
34 World Bank (2010a) 
 13 
benchmark wage in the economy, so that private sector wages come to be set conditional on 
the level of public wages.  
The most striking case is Egypt where over 20% of wage employment is in the public 
sector and where wage levels have remained low and falling since 200035  Energy subsidies 
and the capital pricing regime have also affected the factor mix resulting in a declining labour 
share. Low wages have in turn been associated with a high exposure to poverty; over 40% of 
Egyptian households in 2008/2009 fell below an upper poverty line36. With energy 
consumption accounting for between 4.5-6.5% of household expenditure among the lower 
two expenditure quintiles, in 2010 it was estimated that a reduction in energy subsidies would 
induce at least a 4% decline in income in the lowest quintile.  Further, aside from the impact 
of possible subsidy withdrawal on poor households, moving away from sustained price 
repression would also induce a large effect on the price level. In this instance, it can be seen 
that low compensation levels in an economy (not just the incidence of poverty) that have 
historically been part offset by cheap energy would impose very large adjustment costs. 
These costs and their timing can deter attempts at reform and contribute to persistence, as 
has clearly been the case in Egypt, but also in other countries37.   
 
5.4 Funding 
Energy subsidies are commonly costly fiscally. However, financing can be through non-
inflationary means or through an inflation tax. If the former is used, the cost of any subsidy-
related deficit will fall mainly on later generations. If not available, then the inflation tax – as 
fiscal deficits become monetised - will largely fall on the notional beneficiaries of these 
transfers. In the latter case, this may actually help explain why energy subsidies can be 
attractive to particular types of governments as they provide asymmetric benefits to 
recipients. This will be particularly true if the actual benefits of an energy subsidy are 
concentrated - say, in a particular sector - while much of the cost of the subsidy is diffused 
through the inflation tax and borne by a far wider constituency. One implication is that, 
                                                 
35 In 2007 average weekly wage levels in the public sector were around $55 and under $40 in the private sector, 
while real wages had fallen by between 25-33% since 2000. 
36 Roughly 20% of households were grouped between the upper and lower poverty lines. This amounts to 
around 500 Egyptian pounds per annum and, as such, constitutes a very narrow band. 
37 See, for example, Herrera (2010) 
 14 
dependent on how subsidies are financed, while households or firms may receive some level 
of benefit from an energy subsidy, the real benefit after adjustment for prices, may be much 
smaller.  
 
5.5 Beliefs 
There are a very limited number of attempts – using household surveys and/or focus groups 
– that explore explicitly the attitudes of citizens regarding energy subsidies.  The World 
Values Survey (WVS) asks the same questions to a large number of individuals in a large 
number of countries. Although this survey was not explicitly concerned with energy 
subsidies, it did ask respondents about their attitudes to risk, as well as with respect to type 
of preferred political system and other variables38. Respondents’ attitudes regarding income 
differentials, competition, the role of government, as well as sources of success and wealth 
were selected39. Individual responses, as well as an average score for the response to these six 
questions, were used. These responses were interpreted as an indicator(s) of respondents’ 
attitudes to risk. For example, a respondent favouring greater income equality or a greater 
share of government ownership of business or that the government should take more 
responsibility to ensure that everyone is provided for, was considered to be expressing a 
greater aversion to risk than someone favouring larger income differences, more competition 
and/or a lower role for government40.  
                                                 
38 Interestingly, for those Middle East/Maghreb countries in the WVS not only were mean responses more 
favourable to democracy than for the sample as a whole but the belief that subsidising the poor was an essential 
aspect of democracy was a widely held view, again with a mean score significantly higher than for the full 
sample and/or for other middle income countries. 
39 More exactly the questions ask respondents to place their views on a scale of 1 to 10. The left hand of the 
scale (viz., 1) signifies complete agreement with the proposition as does 10 for the proposition on the right 
hand side. The statements are (a) Incomes should be made more equal(1)….We need larger income differences 
as incentives for individual effort (10); (b) Government ownership of business and industry should be increased 
(1)….Private ownership of business and industry should be increased (10); (c) The government should take 
more responsibility to ensure that everyone is provided for (1)…..People should take more responsibility to 
provide for themselves (10); (d) Competition is harmful. It brings out the worst in people (1)….Competition is 
good. It stimulate people to work hard and develop new ideas (10); (e) Hard work does not generally bring 
success – it is more a matter of luck and connections (1)….In the long run, hard work usually brings a long life 
(10); (f) People can only get rich at the expense of others (1)…..wealth can grow so there is enough for 
everyone (10). 
40 There was significant variation across countries as also within countries. For example, with respect to income 
equality the mean score for the full sample was 6.1 with a standard deviation of 3.1 and a range of ≥7.5 (Peru, 
Ghana) to ≥4.2 (Iran, India).  
 15 
Using data for over 90 countries and 24,000 respondents from the fifth wave of the 
WVS in 2005/6, analysis indicated that being male, being educated and having a higher 
professional status was associated with a greater appetite for risk, while working in a public 
sector institution and lower self-reported social class was not. A subsequent stage of the 
analysis was to match the WVS data for the 25 countries that overlapped with the IEA 
subsidies dataset41. The measure of risk was then related not only to the characteristics of 
individual respondents but also to the amount of spending on subsidies in a given country. 
In most instances in the regression analysis, the subsidy variable was negatively signed and 
highly significant. While it is not possible to identify causality, it does suggest that energy 
subsidies are associated with greater risk aversion, even after controlling for individual 
attributes. If energy subsidies were effective measures of risk mitigation, this might, in effect, 
permit individuals to take more risk than they would in their absence. This does not seem to 
be the case, suggesting that energy subsidies may be part of a wider pathology of beliefs that 
err towards greater aversion to risk. A further implication is that countries with energy 
subsidies appear to have citizens that favour policies which are more state-centred and less 
favourable to markets. This makes reform of subsidy regimes particularly complex, not least 
because it suggests that, given individuals’ beliefs, public institutions may need to play a 
central role in any reform if credibility is to be achieved.         
 
6. Framing reform 
How should the reform of energy subsidies be presented, managed and executed when 
considering both political and other constraints? Evidence from a large number country 
experiences suggests that instantaneous, wholesale reform has generally been infeasible. 
While, in principle, ‘shock therapy’ has several virtues, including on the fiscal side but also 
through limiting the scope for hoarding and speculation, anticipatory inflation and the space 
for opponents of reform to mobilise, the evidence unambiguously shows that more gradual 
approaches to reform have dominated. Clearly, part of the reason for this preference has 
often been the scale of adjustment to energy prices that has been required, but also the 
perceived extent of opposition to reform, whether organised or not.  Yet, gradual reform 
                                                 
41 The detailed results from the exercises described in this section are available on request and are also reported 
in Commander et al (2011) 
 16 
programmes have also often proven to be problematic and subject to reversal. In addition, 
from a policy perspective, ordering reforms mainly on the grounds of feasibility may itself be 
distortionary and/or inefficient42.  
Energy subsidies commonly have a range of objectives, from rewarding specific 
interest groups to reducing the amount of income risk faced by recipients. The weight of 
these different motivations – and their associated constraints – will obviously have to 
influence the design of any reform strategy. At the same time, the scale and locus of 
distortions or cost imposed on the economy by subsidies will be relevant in deciding on 
priorities. However, given differences across countries and the complex skein of effects – 
direct and indirect, static and dynamic - a reform strategy obviously cannot be reduced to a 
simple template. The following sections lay out some of the key analytical and practical steps 
that need to be taken when designing and implementing reform. These steps are grouped 
into several stages. 
 
6.1 Country characteristics  
The first stage has to be largely descriptive where the principal objective is to understand the 
key attributes of the institutional and political system, the main players and the space in 
which they interact in terms of their announced objectives and the underlying constraints 
they face in both achieving those objectives as well as in possible reform43. A simple list of 
requirements is presented in Boxes 1-3. These group the data needs into three broad 
categories: expenditure and fiscal; motivation and outcomes and political and institutional.   
It can be seen that these country level (and in some instances regional) descriptive data 
include not only the type and scale of disaggregated energy subsidies – e.g., by source - but 
also the context in which energy pricing decisions are made and implemented, taking into 
account the organisation of local institutions and other factors structuring decision-making. 
These include information on where and how energy pricing decisions are made, for 
example, by the Presidency, Ministry of Finance or an independent agency, among other 
possibilities. In addition, it would be desirable to know whether energy pricing is determined 
                                                 
42 For example, by addressing subsidies only on selected energy sources on account of the relative ease of 
reform.   
43 A diagnostic approach has also been applied in the context of constraints to growth by Hausmann, Rodrik 
and Velasco (2007), as well as in the extensive country literature that has followed. 
 17 
in an ad hoc or discretionary manner or whether particular pricing rules are followed and with 
what frequency of adjustment in cases where pricing departs from market setting.  
The diagnostics also crucially involve trying to identify the declared objectives or 
motivation of any energy subsidy and then identifying the correspondence (or lack of) 
between those objectives and actual outcomes (e.g., reaching poorer households, boosting 
access and so on). The aim is to identify whether the policy objective is, firstly, a desirable 
one and, secondly, whether it is one that is being achieved and with what effectiveness. Aside 
from identifying the main drivers, whether ideological, interest groups or as features of a 
wider economic strategy, and their key indicators, this will require detailed incidence analysis 
linked to a political-economy narrative and an associated timeline. This broad approach is 
sometimes referred to as stakeholder analysis44. 
For the incidence analysis, a distinction should be drawn between households and 
firms. For households, a recent household expenditure survey is a pre-requisite. For firm 
and/or sector level analysis, data on energy consumption, pricing and balance sheets are also 
desirable45. To model the likely impact of any change in the level of an energy subsidy, input-
output tables or a SAM (Social Accounting Matrix) can help identify the direct and indirect 
effects of changes in energy subsidies across the main agents. By itself, this will not allow 
judgement as to whether the subsidy represents a socially efficient way of achieving the goals 
of policy, but it does facilitate a better understanding of the correspondence between stated 
objectives and outcomes.  In this regard, a country’s institutional capacity will also play an 
important role insofar as that capacity will determine the channels through which subsidies 
and/or transfers can be distributed. Information on the institutional set-up, capacity and 
delivery systems is essential.  
 
6.2 Identifying constraints on reform 
Identifying the main constraints to the reduction or elimination of energy subsidies is 
essential. Self evidently, these will differ across countries and may range from 
                                                 
44 See, for example, World Bank (2008) and for a specific application to Morocco, Litvack and Chaherli (2009) 
45 Note that these data are often not available (as in the case of input-output tables) or hard to collect. For 
example, the Business Environment and Economic Performance (BEEPS) survey that samples a large number 
of firms in the transition countries no longer tries to collect such detailed information due to difficulties in 
getting accurate responses. 
 18 
macroeconomic constraints - for example, the potential inflationary consequences of price 
adjustments to energy46 - to the entrenched power of particular lobbies, institutional capacity 
and/or the inability of particular types of political authority to commit credibly to different 
policies. This also involves understanding the incentives facing politicians, many of which 
will be shaped by the configuration of the political system and its institutions.  
Figures 7 & 8 provide a diagrammatic representation of the main actors, political 
institutions and constraints – and the inter-linkages – that exist. A distinction is drawn 
between broadly pluralistic and autocratic settings as it is clear that the political system can 
have a significant influence on the nature of those constraints, most strikingly in terms of the 
interaction between government and citizens. However, as there are often significant 
differences between types of democracies and types of autocracies, the framework set out 
here is deliberately cast to be encompassing.  
Figure 7 lays out the main players in a broadly democratic or pluralistic polity, 
including the government, citizens, political parties and specific lobbies. The electoral system 
and its cycle are also included as this may affect the timing of reform: a party recently elected 
with a mandate may, for example, be more able to try reforms early in a term. The figure also 
draws in the government’s institutional capacity and funding constraints, both with respect 
to distributional programmes, such as those targeted at the poor, but also the ability to 
provide transfers to non-poor households, as in a transitional programme aimed at winning 
public support for reform. Indeed, several recent episodes of reform have included transfers 
aimed explicitly at limiting opposition by non-poor consumers to changes in energy pricing.  
Figure 8 repeats the same exercise in the context of an autocratic regime. There are 
obvious differences, not least in the absence or attenuation of political parties (save for 
officially sanctioned parties47) and clearly defined political institutions. Knowledge about 
citizens’ preferences and/or perceptions, as well as the ability to communicate policy 
effectively to voters or citizens, appears to be particularly problematic in autocratic regimes. 
The connection between citizens and government is marked by absence of transparency, let 
                                                 
46 Perhaps the clearest instance of a macroeconomic constraint to energy pricing comes from Egypt. Using 
2008 data Abouleinein et al (2009) estimated that complete subsidy removal would raise the average price level 
of petroleum products by over 800% with the price of energy intensive industries expected to rise by around 
30%. Transport and communications prices would also increase by over 40%. 
47 For example, the Baath Party in Syria. 
 19 
alone feedback. Difficulty in communicating policy may also, in some instances, be traced to 
more fundamental limitations connected with the very legitimacy of the regime in question.  
 
7. Linking reform with compensation and complementary policies 
A central issue in discussion of subsidy reform is the question of whether compensation 
should be offered as part of a wider policy strategy. The assumption is that reform implies 
imposing costs on parts of the population, including, in some instances, vulnerable groups. 
In this context, one question is whether to link reduction or removal of energy subsidies to 
explicit compensatory programmes. Indeed, this association has almost become doxology in 
discussion of the pre-requisites for reform48. A related – and broader - matter concerns the 
architecture of risk mitigation that countries should be aiming to introduce or sustain, 
conditional on their affordability and viability. This covers a very broad policy landscape that 
is largely beyond the scope of this paper. However, a key component in income risk - namely 
the labour market or employment dimensions and, in particular, the issue of how to deal 
with involuntary job losses and unemployment - is discussed below. 
The scope for reducing or eliminating energy subsidies is often potentially large. This 
has led many observers to note that the savings from reduction or elimination should allow 
governments to substitute targeted programmes of assistance using these resources; offering 
compensation to particular groups of losers may be a political pre-requisite for reform49. 
Crudely put, compensating some or all losers from reform can help placate opposition and 
allow reform to proceed. Certainly, country narratives suggest that income losses can be 
quite significant with associated, adverse effects on poverty50. For example, even the 
elimination of a small subsidy on gas cylinders in Jordan – spending on which accounted for 
around 0.4% of GDP in 2010 – would shift the poverty headcount up by roughly 0.5%51. 
The need for - and justification of - compensation mainly depends on the characteristics of 
the losers from reform, and, by association, the type, size and duration of the compensating 
payments. As Box 4 illustrates, compensation to households in Iran was seen as essential for 
                                                 
48 As argued, for example, in World Bank (2011). 
49 The G20 report states that ‘an important condition for subsidy reform is the credibility of the government’s 
commitment to compensate vulnerable groups…..and to use the freed public funds in a beneficial way’, p36 
50 Coady et al (2006), Clements, Jung and Gupta (2007)  
51 World Bank (2011b) 
 20 
the viability of reform but the subsequent package of measures was neither targeted, nor 
fiscally improving. 
Some other recent country experiences with subsidy reform – as in Indonesia and 
Jordan – seem to support the view that compensating measures, including wage adjustments 
and transfer payments, can be important facilitators of reform. In Jordan, for example, a 
large nominal price increase in 2008 was coupled with wage and pension increases for public 
sector workers, cash assistance to the poor, including small farmers, and an increase in 
transfers through the National Aid Fund. Interestingly, however, in both Jordan and 
Indonesia, such compensating policy measures have not succeeded in preventing the 
subsequent re-emergence of energy subsidies52.  
There is also the issue of citizens’ preferences about compensation. In particular, 
there is the issue of whether reforms that explicitly limit compensation to ‘deserving’ 
households through better targeting to poor households will be viewed as acceptable and/or 
desirable. Country narratives of energy pricing reform suggest that the assumption that non-
poor households will accept reforms that have an adverse impact on them but not (at least 
relatively) on poor households should not necessarily be made. As will become clear later, 
part of the reason for why this is the case rests with governments’ inability to communicate 
effectively with citizens about incidence, cost and equity.  
A compensation scheme may also be time-inconsistent insofar as there are incentives 
to renege on any deal. This problem – as indicated above – is likely to be present in a non-
democratic context. Compensation to a selected group(s) is likely to be less credible than a 
more universal transfer as the threat of collective action if compensation is withdrawn will be 
weaker in the first instance. Indeed, when opposition to change in energy subsidies is part of 
a wider matter of political legitimacy, the role of compensation may be either peripheral or 
counter-productive.  
Improving the political acceptability of energy pricing reform through the 
introduction of selective compensation packages has been widely discussed and sometimes 
                                                 
52 By 2011 energy subsidies in Jordan climbed back towards 3-4% of GDP largely as a result of new subsidies 
on oil products, while in Indonesia spending on subsidies more than doubled between 2008/2009, with petrol 
subsidies approaching peak 2008 levels. In Iran, the policy objective has been to make domestic and 
international prices converge over a 5 year horizon. Despite the large rise in nominal prices at end-2010, 
domestic prices remain significantly below international prices.  
 21 
implemented. The importance of timing – notably the benefit of providing compensation 
either prior to or contemporaneously with price reform - also stands out. But this is a 
relatively narrow way of viewing compensation. Indeed, other complementary measures, 
particularly if timed well, can be major supports for reform. An example would be 
improvements in the reliability of energy supply or other measures directed at the provision 
of services. In a number of instances – notably some of the Indian states – mispricing of 
energy tends also to be associated with inefficiencies in supply, a consequence of which is 
rationing or excessive variability. In principle, measures taken ex ante that improve the quality 
or reliability of supply might be helpful in supporting the case for pricing reform. Other 
potentially supportive interventions can include improving the supply and terms of 
consumer finance and/or support for the adoption of energy-conserving technology. 
Structuring the path of reforms so as to deliver tangible benefits prior to price adjustment is 
particularly likely to provide support for the latter. 
 
8. Compensating households 
In what follows, the compensation problem for households is principally – but not 
exclusively – examined through the poverty angle53. As argued above, energy subsidies can 
have an impact on poorer households’ income levels, the reduction of which can have 
adverse consequences for both the incidence and depth of poverty. But in some cases – 
Egypt and Iran are perhaps the most striking example – the direct and indirect effects of 
subsidy reform can affect a far wider swathe of households, making the policy challenge yet 
harder. Further, there may be an important political dimension that compels recourse to a 
staggered or limited reduction in subsidies in order to avert blocking by adversely affected 
non-poor constituencies.  
 
8.1 Institutional capacity 
Minimising the impact of proposed changes to energy prices on poor households should be 
a policy goal.  However, achieving that objective through provision of compensation is also 
axed on a strong premise – namely, that compensation for loss or reduction of energy 
                                                 
53 An interesting example focused on Morocco is Fruman and Yemtsov (2008) 
 22 
subsidies can be delivered effectively and expeditiously. The question is whether a country 
has the institutional ability to deliver narrower – that is, more targeted – transfers to well 
identified households or individuals. From a practical perspective, whether a government has 
the information – who is poor and to what degree - and the institutional capacity to deliver 
compensating transfers are material considerations.  
Box 4: Iran – Innovation in design but weak results  
Recent Iranian experience is one of the largest and most ambitious attempts at energy 
subsidy reform explicitly linking reform to compensating transfers. Part of this can be 
attributed to the size of the required price adjustment. By 2010, energy subsidies amounted 
to nearly 15% of GDP. This meant that large nominal adjustments to energy prices were 
required. The compensation element involved a commitment to redistribute to households 
up to 50% of the fiscal savings and a further 30% to firms to cover restructuring costs in the 
first year54. In effect, government committed to clawing back no more than 20% of fiscal 
savings in that initial period. A further component of the reform was the explicit use of 
compensatory payments or allowances as well as their timing. Households were initially 
granted relatively generous allowances of low priced fuel. Initially households were granted 
120 litres - subsequently reduced to 60 litres - of fuel at a price equivalent to 55% of 
international prices. Cash transfers were also made to households prior to the price reform 
to build credibility. Originally, the intention was to focus such transfers on poorer 
households. In reality, these transfers were more universal in nature than targeted as over 
80% of the population received the transfer. This was accompanied by an intensive 
programme of public communication, coupled to explicit warnings to the population about 
the consequences of non-cooperation. In the 18 months since introduction of the price 
reforms, inflation has accelerated – in part as a consequence of the way in which the reform 
has been carried out. Far larger than intended – and increasing - monthly transfers to most 
Iranian households, as well as cross-border smuggling of fuel have eroded the fiscal gains. 
Indeed, by 2012 energy subsidies had swollen to around 17.5% of GDP as political 
considerations have dominated.  Despite some cleverly designed features of the reform, the 
Iranian experience illustrates the difficulty in staying the course. 
                                                 
54 Some 12,000 firms were surveyed and around 7,000 offered some form of compensation including lower fuel 
costs, interest rate subsidies on loans for adopting more energy efficient technology and other credit lines. 
 23 
Reaching only poor households adversely affected by reform of energy pricing may 
require using existing transfer programmes – whether conditional or unconditional – that are 
scalable and/or initiating a new and possibly specific transfer. In Iran, the design of the 
reform initially involved a new and non-universal compensating transfer for households. Yet 
targeting that transfer at poorer households proved infeasible on both technical and political 
grounds55. In other countries, such India, while the ability to target may be far more 
developed, the ability to deliver transfers effectively to designated beneficiaries has still been 
the principal limitation56. In Indonesia, attempts at energy pricing reform since 2005 have all 
been explicitly associated with the introduction of contemporaneous compensation packages 
– such as an unconditional cash transfer – as well as the subsequent expansion of other 
social welfare programmes. In general, low income countries and non-democracies tend to 
be most constrained, whether with regard to existing or new transfer interventions.   
If institutional frailty impedes effective targeting of transfers, it is possible that use of 
subsidies that are weakly targeted but are intensively consumed by poor households may still 
be one of the more effective ways of transferring income to those groups. This may imply 
that there is a case for using limited, consumption-discriminating subsidy as a transitional 
transfer instrument. But that would, of course, imply that it is temporary and mainly a 
stepping stone to a more effective targeting regime relying on non-subsidy transfers. The 
evidence – particularly in the Middle East and Asia – suggests that this transition often does 
not occur. 
 
8.2 Energy consumption weights 
The extent to which any particular energy subsidy reduction or removal affects poorer 
households depends on the respective weights of different energy types in their consumption 
baskets57. Among possible measures, use of cross-subsidies to energy sources relatively 
intensively consumed by the poor is an option that has been quite widely applied. Block 
tariffs have also been widely used for electricity. These require metering and allow some 
                                                 
55 Consequently over 80% of the population received compensatory payments, see Guillaume et al (2011). 
56 The Indian Government hopes to use a national programme of identity/smart cards to target energy 
subsidies to poor consumers and in so doing, move away from across-the-board price controls. 
57 This can vary widely. In the transition countries, for example, the share of expenditures on energy for the 
bottom quintile ranged between 6-21% in 2008/9.  
 24 
targeting to poorer expenditure groups with, for instance, the first block of consumption 
priced low. They can also be made consistent with other tariff routines, such as peak or 
timed pricing. The fiscal implications of price discrimination will also depend on the size of 
the first or lifeline block.  Many of the same considerations apply to tariffs that differentiate 
on the basis of quantities consumed. For example, in Egypt, two-tier tariffs for petrol and 
LNG have been proposed with ration card holders allowed to purchase fixed amounts at 
subsidised prices58. Earmarked transfers have also been applied, notably in Eastern Europe59. 
But the scope for targeting may be limited if connections are rationed and/or limited among 
poorer consumers. This approach also does not easily adapt to petroleum products, although 
use of smart cards may partly overcome the problem60.  
 
8.3 Timing 
The timing with which subsidies are reduced or eliminated may also be relevant. When 
energy subsidies have been allowed to become large, the use of a graduated programme of 
price reform - coupled with transitional energy subsidies to support adoption of other energy 
sources (e.g., subsidisation of connection fees) - may be relevant, as well as politically more 
acceptable61.  Clearly, facilitating access makes sense either if it helps poorer households shift 
to more efficient energy sources or as part of a wider strategy moving consumers away from 
socially costly energy sources. Equivalently, compensating cash transfers can be applied to 
mitigate. In such instances, the obvious aim is to taper those transfers over time. But as with 
any strategy that involves staggered price changes - such as small but frequent adjustments - 
the obvious risk is that political opposition will have time to form. And even when the 
principle of selective compensation has been adopted, the success or failure of a reform can 
depend not just on the scale of compensation and its incidence but also the timing. The 
Nigerian attempt at raising fuel prices in 2012 (see Box 5) illustrates the pitfalls. 
 
                                                 
58 Note that this approach is quite administratively demanding; a smart card is a pre-requisite. In the Egyptian 
case it might at best allow fuel subsidies to be cut by an amount equivalent to 1% of GDP. 
59 World Bank (2010) provides a good discussion of the different subsidy mechanisms, see pp67-71. For 
Central and Eastern Europe, see World Bank (2011) 
60 The Iranians, for example, began in 2012 to introduce smart cards for petrol.  
61 Not that improving access in many cases is unlikely to be a substitute for price subsidies, as the beneficiaries 
of connection and price subsidies are likely to be different. 
 25 
8.4 Non-poor households 
In cases where energy subsidies are large and have been persistent, as well as where subsidies 
are widely viewed as providing some form of social support, a workable political strategy 
may involve a retreat from universal energy subsidies through the staging post of reduced 
subsidies to wider non-poor constituencies who otherwise might be able to block or delay 
reform. This has been the approach taken by the Iranian and Indonesian governments in 
recent reform episodes. In Indonesia in 2011, the policy discussion shifted to the merits of 
providing non-poor consumers fuel using a convertible fuel voucher – an entitlement to a 
fixed volume of petrol that can be converted into cash. But faced with a spiralling subsidy 
bill, in 2012, the government has tried to raise fuel prices only to be checked by 
disagreement between the Parliament and Executive. This has forced the latter to shift focus 
to trying to cap consumption by excluding sale of subsidised fuel to some groups of private 
motorists. The main aim has been to make reform more acceptable among the wider 
population.  Distribution of vouchers or coupons – a feature also of the first Syrian energy 
price reform in 2007 – has been viewed as far less information intensive (although with its 
own set of possible distortions) and, at the same time, politically attractive.  
 
Box 5: Pitfalls of reforming large and sustained subsidies: Nigeria in 2012 
Energy subsidies in Nigeria had increased nearly tenfold between 2006 and 2011, amounting 
to between $8-16 billion by 2011. A parliamentary report published in 2012 which arrived at 
the higher $16 billion figure also estimated that the country had lost around $7 billion due to 
corruption and mismanagement of its fuel subsidy programme between 2009 and 2011. To 
put this in further context, the total fuel subsidy bill has been higher than that of budgetary 
spending on education, health and social protection combined.   
In January, 2012 Nigeria attempted a radical reform of the subsidies system. Prices 
were jumped by 120% but at the same time some compensating payments – principally 
increments to wages - were offered to public employees, as well as the announcement of a 
subsidy reinvestment and empowerment programme (SURE) to be implemented over the 
coming 3-4 years. The latter included a range of palliative measures, such as vocational 
training, conditional cash transfers and spending on public works. The response by 
 26 
significant sections of the population was not accepting. Strikes and civil unrest followed, 
leading to the government having to limit the increase in fuel prices to around 50% as 
against the intended 120%.  
What explains the limited success of this attempt at reform? First, the size of the 
price gap had grown to very large proportions, which implied a major fiscal cost. Yet, much 
of the population, as well as firms, had become accustomed to low fuel prices and had 
adapted their behaviour accordingly. This bolstered resistance to change. Second, because of 
the size of the price wedge, reform had to involve a large price adjustment. But this was 
implemented unilaterally without any prior and intensive public information campaign, as 
well as a limited understanding on the part of government of the likely impact of the increase 
on different types of households. Third, the efforts of the government to mitigate the effects 
of the price increase came late, under pressure and with limited coverage. They were also 
weakly justified to the population. Moreover, many of the wider mitigation measures - 
mainly planned through the SURE programme - were to be rolled out over the coming 
years, rather than immediately. This time path was poorly synchronised with the shock to 
incomes directly and indirectly associated with the reform. Finally, the whole episode 
highlights the difficulty of engineering change when government itself is viewed as venal and 
self-interested and lacks credibility as a vehicle for reform. 
 
 
9. Understanding preferences 
Behind almost all episodes of subsidy reform is the question of political acceptability. This 
may take the form of a party or President’s re-election prospects or, particularly in the case 
of non-democracies, whether people take to the street and/or challenge the current regime. 
Certainly, the apprehension that such outcomes might occur appears to be a central 
consideration. Because of this, a key issue concerns the ability of policy-makers to know how 
to structure reform in a way that minimises the political costs. As indicated earlier, this is 
generally more problematic in non-democracies. 
 
 
 27 
9.1 Identifying choices 
In motivating subsidy reform, a common thread of argument is that shifting from a universal 
sort of subsidy to one that is more targeted is normally good practice. Yet this contains a 
strong underlying assumption; namely, that a sufficient share of citizens will be prepared to 
accept some loss in welfare for themselves if, however, that loss is spread in a way that 
supports equity62. In other words, in a reform of energy pricing, it is assumed that support 
may rise if poorer households are seen either to lose less or possibly gain. While there may 
indeed be grounds for assuming that this sort of benevolence is present, this has, so far, been 
little tested empirically. Indeed, the wider literature on redistribution – mostly centred on 
advanced market economies - has found evidence for a number of motivational drivers, 
including self-interest, social preferences as well as aversion to inequality with variation 
across countries63.  For example, in the context of pension reform, choice experiments have 
found that altruism and social preferences indeed play a role. The impact on poverty of any 
revised policy has been found to affect significantly the probability of choice64. Yet use of 
choice experiments in developing or emerging countries to determine the respective weights 
of self-interest and benevolence, has been almost non-existent, let alone with respect to the 
specifics of energy subsidies. This is a key area that will repay greater attention by policy-
makers as an input to their formulation of policy. For this to be robust, however, requires 
close attention to design. 
 
9.2 Implementation 
Testing different policy options in the population can be implemented in a variety of ways 
and with different associated bias. To date, use of focus groups, sometimes linked to, or 
sampled from, larger household surveys, has been the main approach (see Box 6). This can 
undoubtedly offer important insights but remains open to criticism regarding sample size 
and selection. Further, in the case of focus groups, the way in which the questions are posed 
and the structuring of discussion will be critical and is open to problems of bias. Focus 
groups may also be particularly problematic in political contexts where freedom of 
                                                 
62 See, for example, Fong (2001). 
63 In the context of advanced market economies, see, inter alia, Boeri et al (2001), Ferrara (1993), Lynch (2006) 
64 In the Irish context, see Fourati et al (2009) 
 28 
expression is not a given and where the incentives for disclosure of beliefs may be qualified. 
Similarly, large heterogeneity in the population whether in terms of characteristics (such as 
income) or in terms of beliefs may compromise drawing workable policy conclusions65.  Yet 
despite these limitations, small or focus group discussion offers probably the most feasible 
and cost-effective way of exploring different policy options and underlying preferences. 
  Alternative or complementary approaches include field experiments66. For obvious 
reasons, the subsidy problem is not likely to generate a natural field experiment, so that the 
principal design challenge will be to randomise subjects into appropriate treatment and 
control groups. Use of what Levitt and List (2009) classify as ‘artefactual’ and ‘framed’ 
experiments may be appropriate, insofar as they can be directly linked to a menu of public 
policy67. This sort of approach is likely to be particularly rewarding when there is 
considerable uncertainty about individuals’ beliefs and preferences, as might be expected to 
be the case in a non-democratic setting.  
 
10. Political communication 
Attempts at subsidy reform illustrate repeatedly the importance of how policy is presented to 
the population. A recent example of limited and ineffectual communication was in Bolivia 
where nominal petrol and diesel prices were hiked by between 57-83% in December 2010 
with little prior communication to the population (see Box 7). The wider country evidence on 
communication suggests that governments – democratic and non-democratic - have 
consistently struggled to cast subsidy reduction in a positive or welfare-enhancing light and 
to design effective communications strategies. This is partly because particular group/region 
self-interest – as with groups who intensively use subsidised energy – may dominate, but also 
because extra-group benefits (i.e., national welfare) have been difficult to convey, particularly 
when wider issues of perceived equity are also present. In Iran, communication about the 
objectives of reform concentrated on the un-sustainability of the 
                                                 
65 Interestingly, the study of butane gas and wheat subsidies in Morocco using focus groups found that 
heterogeneity among the main attitudinal segments was too large to allow effective targeting in terms of 
political communication, see World Bank (2010a).  
66 In principle, because of the emphasis on policy, large scale social experiments could be used. However, such 
approaches are normally highly intensive in time and resources and rarely match to the political timescale. 
67 See, for example, an application concerning willingness to pay, Rozan et al (2004) 
 29 
fiscal costs, as well as the consequences, including waste and pollution and the impact of 
other factors, such as sanctions. There was an intensive public relations campaign using 
different media, as well as an attempt to educate the population about the costs of the 
subsidy regime. There was also a focus on the distributional nature of the problem, notably 
 
Box 6: Probing the beliefs of citizens regarding subsidies: Morocco 
In Morocco, subsidies for both energy and food have for long been a sensitive feature of the 
policy landscape. In 2010, the government – as part of its soundings for reform – decided to 
commission a study of citizens’ views regarding two particular subsidies – those for butane 
gas and wheat. The study would also explore the options for a change in policy. The 
perceived constraint was the unwillingness of major sections of the population to accept 
such changes and a lack of clarity as to how to initiate a public discussion of possible 
changes in policy (itself partly a consequence of the political system). The study, involving 
the use of focus groups and individual interviews, found that the system of subsidies was 
widely viewed as necessary, even among social groups who benefited relatively little from the 
subsidy. Most considered that the provision of subsidies was not only ‘normal’ practice but 
also beneficial, even if of benefit principally to richer households, and only 30-40% accepted 
the proposition that subsidies were not sustainable fiscally. Although nearly 50% of 
respondents were open to reform on the grounds that the current system was unjust and/or 
inefficient, around half of this group did not trust the current government to carry out 
reform, even though existing transfer programmes – such as RAMED, Tayssir and 
Promotion Nationale - were generally perceived as being effective. In short, the evidence 
indicated that in 2010 it would be difficult to put together an effective coalition for reform. 
It also highlighted the need for better communication of policy options as a pre-condition 
for building any effective coalition in the future.  
 
the regressive consequences of subsidies68. But this attention to communication - albeit one 
underpinned by the frequently announced willingness to suppress dissent to reform – has 
been surprisingly rare. Governments have struggled to present an effective case for why 
                                                 
68 See Guillaume et al (2011) 
 30 
subsidies should be reduced with argument for reform mainly limited to the budgetary 
and/or balance of payments costs. Even in the transition countries where so-called hidden 
costs (such as low collection rates) of electricity subsidies, in particular, have been high (in 
some Central Asian countries they have amounted to over 10% of GDP), governments have 
been largely unable to use this to their advantage. Mention has already been made of the 
importance of introducing complementary non-price reforms that improve access to energy 
supply or finance preceding pricing reform. These benefits need also to be communicated 
effectively. 
Yet, in short, whatever the design and sequencing of energy subsidy reform, it is 
striking in general how poorly governments of all hues have performed when framing 
political communication about subsidies.  
 
Box 7: Decision-making and communication in a botched fuel price reform: Bolivia 
in 2010/11 
An abortive attempt at fuel price reform in Bolivia was made in December 2010. Decision-
making was concentrated in the hands of the President and his immediate associates. Energy 
price setting - due to the infrequency of adjustment - meant that the distance of domestic 
from international prices was very substantial. The size of this price gap motivated the 
government to attempt a large adjustment to domestic energy prices. There was, however, a 
lack of prior preparation and communication with the citizenry about the scope and timing 
of the reform. The lack of transparency with respect to policy goals was accompanied by the 
absence of any workable compensation scheme. No consideration had been paid to what 
sort of transitional compensation ought to be paid and to which particular constituencies. 
Further, institutional and other frailties meant that the main lever for compensation had to 
be through relatively general wage increases. Indeed, faced with pressure from the street, the 
government moved to offer wage increments but only for public sector workers. Escalating 
protests led to the government rapidly abandoning reform. 
 
 
 
 31 
11. Firm and labour market effects 
The discussion so far has centred on household exposure to energy subsidies. Yet, energy 
pricing commonly has a large impact on the firm sector and the labour market, particularly 
when firms and sectors in an economy have high energy intensity, sometimes as a 
consequence of the persistent mis-pricing of energy (as in Egypt or Iran). Compensation to 
lower the costs to firms of investing in plant and/or infrastructure assembled in a period of 
subsidised energy prices may be very costly. As such, reduction or elimination of energy 
subsidies can have a potentially large impact on profitability - even on viability - and can be 
associated with large job losses69. Yet lay-offs can not only be economically costly but are 
also politically difficult and commonly constitute a major barrier to reform70. 
Country narratives suggest that fear of the employment consequences of energy 
subsidy reform is indeed a major consideration and constraint on reform.  While it may be 
desirable to deal directly with the merits and viability of employment-related policies without 
attaching them directly to the reform of subsidies, there may be cases where linking the two 
will be advantageous from a political economy perspective. Simply eliminating energy 
subsidies to firms who have internalised a different cost structure may impose too difficult a 
burden, so that phased reforms with/without targeted support to firms to restructure may be 
relevant71. However, it is important to separate out relatively short run compensation 
measures for job losers from the longer run question of what sort of system for dealing with 
employment risk should be put in place. As such, there is both the relatively narrow question 
of whether dealing with employment risk can make subsidy reform more feasible (and if so, 
does that imply that the former should be a policy objective), as well as the broader matter of 
how to deal with employment risk more generally in a way that does not set up bad 
incentives and is also affordable.   
                                                 
69 This will depend on the extent to which firms can pass on price increases to consumers and the elasticity of 
demand, as well as the ability to separate workers. A negative price shock can also be met by changing 
technology aimed at reducing energy consumption and/or by lowering other costs, notably wages. Nominal 
wage adjustment is always difficult, so adjustment through employment – either lay-offs and/or shorter 
working time – has tended to dominate.  
70 This may be particularly true when employment is highly concentrated spatially, as in the so-called one-
company towns that continue to populate the countries of the former Soviet Union. 
71 Phasing of price reforms in principle gives firms time to adapt their expenditure and inputs mix but 
prolonged implementation schedules have the usual disadvantage of giving space for opposition to reform to 
coalesce. 
 32 
11.1 Dealing with job losses 
The usual options for dealing with lay-offs include severance pay with/without training, 
support for job search and/or the provision of unemployment benefits and/or social 
assistance to job losers. Yet in most emerging and developing countries, unemployment 
insurance is both institutionally difficult as well as fiscally challenging. That has left severance 
as the dominant mode of response. But severance has obvious limits and by itself is a weak 
instrument for addressing the income insecurity that employment risk poses and which may 
be a significant factor behind the use of alternative (and highly inefficient) instruments for 
income support, such as energy subsidies72. Further, severance may be able to deal with only 
a proportion of possible job losers for fiscal reasons, as also because coverage would 
generally apply only to the formal sector73.   
For many developing and emerging countries, the central challenge is to move away 
from high severance payments and employment protection to publicly provided 
unemployment insurance and lower severance costs74.  This shift would be essential if 
grafting on some element of unemployment insurance to existing systems of (excessive) 
employment protection is to be avoided. Firms would in principle gain from the increase in 
discretion regarding hiring and firing decisions. At the same time, reductions in payroll tax 
rates for employers could be made to reflect a rebalancing of risk sharing and to increase the 
attraction of the policy shift. 
A relatively small number of emerging markets – Turkey, Korea and the transition 
economies - have already established systems of unemployment insurance. However, 
coverage remains low across all regions, as do replacement rates75.  Moreover, 
unemployment insurance – at least in the OECD manner - is costly fiscally76, as well as 
having potentially adverse incentives77. Unemployment insurance may also be too 
demanding institutionally for many developing countries. With large informal sectors – in 
                                                 
72 The evidence suggests, for example, that this has been a factor in Egypt and other North African countries. 
73 As to how unemployment benefits can work in a model of restructuring, see Commander and 
Tolstopiatenko (1998), also Blanchard (1997) 
74 Blanchard (2004) 
75 Vroman and Brusentsev (2009) 
76 Including unemployment benefits, social protection expenditure accounts for over 25% of GDP in Western 
Europe. 
77 Benefits have been found to affect non-participation as well as the duration of unemployment, not least as 
indicated by the jump in job matching that occurs when eligibility for receipt of benefits expires.. 
 33 
India, for example, the relative share of the formal sector in industrial employment is under 
10%78- there are also major issues regarding the feasibility of broadening coverage.  
Given these drawbacks, other approaches have placed a greater emphasis on self-
insurance79. In particular, to reduce moral hazard, merging elements of saving or self 
insurance with a funded insurance component has been discussed80.  Employers and, in 
some cases, workers would deposit a specific share of a worker’s earnings in an individual 
savings account. In case of job loss, workers can draw on these accounts. The main 
difference in the design of various self-insurance schemes is whether redistribution or 
borrowing is allowed. In Chile, for example, private contributions are supplemented by 
public insurance81.  
Yet, any system with redistribution (using public funds) will raise many of the same 
problems as a publicly funded insurance system. Further, such schemes do not address the 
problem of layoffs by making firms internalise the cost of the public resources used to 
complement any self-insurance element82. Self-insurance also requires high levels of 
institutional capacity and integrity, including a financial system capable of managing and 
investing the array of individual accounts. Particular groups of workers may be unable to 
generate sufficient savings to draw down over an unemployment spell. This is likely to be 
particularly true for young workers who commonly face higher hazards of unemployment, as 
well as low wage earners in the informal sector83. In economies where wage levels are 
relatively low, workers may be unwilling to save for events that are hard to predict and to 
which they may attach very widely differing probabilities. Indeed, the savings shortfall 
criticism may also hold in aggregate in some developing countries.   
While there may be both efficiency and welfare reasons for trying to introduce 
unemployment fallbacks, there tend - as with subsidies – to be inevitable political economy 
                                                 
78 OECD (2007), p121 
79 For example, Vodopivec (2009) 
80 See Robalino et at (2009) for a good overview 
81 Van Ours et al (2010) 
82 Blanchard (2004) 
83 An additional criticism is that they are unsuitable for large informal sectors. In principle, adopting an explicit 
redistributive objective through the use of public resources could allow extension of coverage to informal 
workers (Robalino et al (2009)). It is not clear whether (a) such an extension of coverage would match to 
demand, (b) would be administratively and institutionally feasible and finally, (c) would be free from the usual 
design problems facing more conventional programmes.  
 
 34 
constraints. Incumbent beneficiaries of the status quo are often employed in public sector 
firms, government or in large private companies that are unionised and where the voice for 
protection is often powerful. Many governments also draw their political support from the 
protected sector through providing superior benefits and other employment based privileges.  
These aspects suggest that trying to deploy some explicit form of unemployment insurance 
as a counter-policy to existing combinations of subsidies, employment protection and/or 
severance may not only be institutionally and fiscally challenging but may also face non-
trivial political constraints. Nevertheless, in many emerging markets it is likely to be part of 
the solution. 
 
12. Conclusion 
Use of energy subsidies is now widespread among developing and emerging economies. 
While the consequences are generally adverse from an efficiency perspective, subsidies tend 
to confer private benefits on particular groups, including, in some instances, the poor. 
Whatever the political complexion of a country, once introduced, energy subsidies tend to 
become a more permanent feature of policy furniture. This paper has examined the reasons 
why this might be the case and possible ways of overcoming the barriers to reform. Drawing 
extensively on country experiences, the starting point was to look at the motives lying behind 
the adoption of energy subsidies. Distributional motives were found to figure prominently, 
even if there is a large gap between the avowed aims of subsidy programmes and their 
outcomes.  The role of interested parties or lobbies is also a common factor. The paper then 
looked at the characteristics of countries that use energy subsidies. Countries with weak 
institutions – often non-democracies – tend to be associated with higher subsidies. Non-
democracies not only often have major differences between the announced intentions and 
outcomes of subsidy policy but also major problems with their credibility and capacity to 
reform.  Going below the country level of aggregation to the level of individuals or 
households, the paper then looked at how attitudes to risk might affect the ability to reform 
energy subsidies. Energy subsidies and relatively high aversion to risk appear to be 
correlated. While causation is too difficult to resolve, it seems clear that the attitudes of 
citizens are likely to be a major constraining factor on reforming governments.  
 35 
With this in mind, the paper then set about looking at how best country level 
conditions and constraints might be identified. An analytical-cum-policy framework starting 
with some basic diagnostics before moving to a detailed identification of the key constraints 
was proposed. The constraints to reform may trace back to the political system, political 
institutions, as well as institutional capacity - an important consideration when considering 
the possible role for compensating transfers. At the same time, the approach to identifying 
constraints also helps understand the drivers behind energy subsidies, principally in terms of 
beneficiaries, direct and indirect. This leads naturally to an extended discussion of the 
compensation argument – namely that for reform to prosper governments sometimes need 
to consider implementing compensatory transfers, as well as complementary reforms that 
can help improve acceptability. The timing of the introduction of complementary reforms is 
critical. For compensation, institutional capacity is a main determinant as to whether such 
transfers can be targeted on distributional grounds, viz., to the poor. But institutional frailty 
as well as additional considerations of political feasibility may make temporary transfer 
programmes to the non-poor a required feature of reform. The paper also indicates that a 
better understanding of citizens’ policy preferences and the sorts of trade-offs that can be 
accepted is highly desirable, yet rarely undertaken.  
Given the fact that energy subsidies commonly affect firms’ operating margins, as 
well as choice of technology and investment, subsidy reduction can be potentially very 
disruptive to firms and the labour market. This may warrant the use of selective, transitional 
paths of subsidy withdrawal but also consideration of how to mitigate associated 
employment risk, including with respect to those made unemployed through restructuring. 
Addressing employment risk, while difficult in design terms as well as being potentially 
fiscally costly, is, however, likely to be part of the longer term solution to use of energy and 
other subsidies.  
 The paper has covered a large and complex territory, drawing on both the analytical 
literature as well as detailed country narratives.  It has identified some of the main ways in 
which political factors influence whether energy subsidies are used, as well as ways in which 
politics can influence or structure the choice of path and timing of reform. It seems clear 
that reduction or elimination of energy subsidies generally faces significant hurdles among 
 36 
the population, as well as from beneficiary interests and organisations. In the face of these 
hurdles, the evidence suggests that governments interested in reform have rarely done 
adequate preparatory work, let alone worked out how to win over citizens and others in ways 
consistent with the fiscal, institutional and other capacities available to them. The problem is 
most acute in non-democracies but is far from absent in systems where political competition 
is present. 
 37 
References 
Abouleinen, S, H. El-Laithy and H. Kheir-El-Din, (2009), ‘The Impact of Phasing Out 
Subsidies of Petroleum Energy Products in Egypt’ ECES Working Paper 145, April 
Acemoglu, D and J. Robinson (2006), ‘Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy’, 
Cambridge University Press 
Acemoglu, D and J. Robinson (2000), ‘A Theory of Political Transitions’, MIT and UC 
Berkeley, mimeo 
Besley, T, (2004), ‘The New Political Economy’, London School of Economics, mimeo 
Blanchard, O, (2004), ‘Designing labour market institutions’, MIT, mimeo 
Blanchard, O, (2004), ‘Reforming labour market institutions: unemployment insurance and 
employment protection’, Conference on ‘Post-Washington Consensus’, September 
Blanchard, O, (1997), ‘The Economics of Post-Communist Transition’, Clarendon Lectures, OUP 
Boeri, Tito (2000), ‘Structural Change, Welfare Systems and Labour Allocation’, Oxford, OUP 
Burniaux, J et al., (2009), ‘The economics of climate change mitigation’. OECD, Paris, 
Working Paper 
Clements, B, H. Jung and S. Gupta, (2007), ‘Real and distributive effects of petroleum price 
liberalization: The case of Indonesia’, Developing Economies, 45, 2, 220-236 
Coady, D et al (2006), ‘The magnitude and distribution of fuel subsidies: Evidence from 
Bolivia, Ghana, Jordan, Mali and Sri Lanka’, IMF Working Paper 
Commander, S (with C. Amini and Z. Nikoloski), (2011), ‘The Political Economy of Energy 
Subsidies’, London 
Commander, S and A. Tolstopiatenko, (2007), ‘The Role of Unemployment and 
Restructuring in the Transition’, in Simon Commander (ed), ‘Enterprise Restructuring and 
Unemployment in Models of Transition’, World Bank, Washington DC 
Dixit, A, (1996), ‘The Making of Economic Policy: A Transactions Cost Politics Perspective’, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Mass 
Fernandez, R and D. Rodrik (1991), ‘Resistance to reform: status quo bias in the presence of 
individual-specific uncertainty’, American Economic Review, 81, 5, pp1146-1155 
Fruman, C and R. Yemtsov, (2008), ‘Reforme des mecanismes de compensation et de 
protection sociale’, World Bank, mimeo 
 38 
G-20 (2010), ‘Analysis of the Scope of Energy Subsidies and Suggestions for the 
Implementation of their Phasing-Out’, Joint Report of the IEA, OPEC, OECD and the 
World Bank for April Meeting of the G20  
Global Subsidies Initiative, (2011), ‘Phasing out Fossil Fuel Subsidies’, Draft Outline Report 
for the APEC Energy Working Group, mimeo, August 
Grossman, G and E. Helpman, (1994), ’Protection for Sale’, American Economic Review, 84,4, 
pp833-850  
Grossman, G and E. Helpman, (2002), ‘Special Interest Politics’, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Muller, C, (2007), ‘Anti-Poverty Transfers without Riots in Tunisia’, DIAL Working Paper, 
University of Alicante 
GTZ, (2007), ‘International Fuel Prices 2007’, 5th edition, Eschborn 
Guillaume, D, R. Zytek and M. Farzin, (2011), ‘Iran – the Chronicles of the Subsidy 
Reform’, IMF Working Paper, WP/11/167 
Herrera, S (2010), ‘Subsidies in Egypt: Alternatives for Reform’, Presentation at ECES 
Workshop, Cairo 5 October 
IMF, (2011), ‘Regional Economic Outlook: Middle East and Central Asia’, Washington DC  
Kanbur, R, (2010), ‘Protecting the poor against the next crisis’, Cornell University, mimeo 
Levitt, S. and J. List, (2009), ‘Field experiments in economics: the past, present and future’, 
European Economic Review, 53, 1-18 
Litvack, J and N. Chaherli, (2008), ‘Stakeholder Analysis on Moroccan Cereal Reform’, 
World Bank, mimeo 
Nikoloski, Zlatko (2011), ‘Energy subsidies and their reform: country narratives’, London, 
mimeo 
Persson, T and G. Tabellini, (2000), ‘Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy’, MIT Press  
Rajan, R, (2009), ‘Rent Preservation and the Persistence of Under-development’, American 
Economic Journal, Macroeconomics, 1, 1, pp178-218 
Robalino, D, M. Vodopivec and A. Bodor, (2009), ‘Savings for unemployment in good and 
bad times: options for developing countries’, IZA Discussion Paper 4516, October 
Rodrik, Dani, (1998), ‘Why do more open economies have bigger governments?’, Journal of 
Political Economy, 106, 51, pp997-1032 
 39 
Rodrik, Dani, R. Hausmann and A. Velasco, (2007), ‘Growth Diagnostics’, in D. Rodrik, 
‘One Economics, Many Recipes’, Princeton University Press 
Rozan, A, A. Strenger and A. Willinger (2004), ‘Willingness to pay for food safety’, European 
Review of Agricultural Economics, 31, pp409-424 
Van Ours, J and M. Vodopivec, (2010), ‘Incentive Effects of Unemployment Insurance 
Savings Accounts: Evidence from Chile’, IZA Discussion Paper 4681 
Vodopivec, M, (2009), ‘Introducing unemployment insurance to developing countries’, IZA 
Policy Paper 6, April 
Vroman, Wayne and Vera Brusentsev, (2009), ‘Unemployment compensation in a worldwide 
recession’, Urban Institute and University of Delaware, mimeo, June 
World Bank, Social Development Department,(2008),‘The Political Economy of Policy Reform‘’, 
World Bank, Washington DC 
World Bank, (2010), ‘Subsidies in the Energy Sector: Measurement, Impact and Design’, 
April, mimeo 
World Bank, (2010a), ‘Analyse de la reforme du systeme de subventions au Maroc’, 22 
September, mimeo 
World Bank, (2011), ‘Balancing act: cutting subsidies, protecting affordability and investing 
in the energy sector in ECA’, May, mimeo 
World Bank, (2011a), ‘Implementing Energy Subsidy Reform: Evidence from Case Studies’, 
Washington DC, September 
World Bank, (2011b), ‘An analysis of consumption subsidies in Jordan’, Washington DC, 
July 21, mimeo
Table 1: Motivation for Energy Subsidies 
                
 
Notional 
Temporary 
Income 
Buffering 
Lobbies 
and 
Specific 
Interest 
Groups 
National 
Patrimony 
Resource 
Sharing 
Component 
of Industrial 
Policy 
Improving 
External 
Competitiveness 
Development 
of alternative 
energy 
supply 
Poverty/equity 
justification 
                
Algeria   X X  X X 
Argentina  X     X 
Bolivia  X     X 
Chile       X 
China  X  X X  X 
Dominican Republic       X 
Egypt  X  X   X 
Ghana X X    X X 
India  X     X 
Indonesia    X  X X 
Iran  X X X  X X 
Jordan  X     X 
Lebanon       X 
Malaysia  X     X 
Mexico   X X  X X 
Morocco  X    X X 
Pakistan  X     X 
Syria X X     X 
Tunisia       X 
Yemen       X 
                
Source: Extracted from Nikoloski (2011)       
 
Direct & Indirect 
Transfers
Tax Exemptions & 
Breaks
Provision of Goods & 
Services Below Market 
Prices
Income or Price 
Support Price wedge
Non-collection of 
energy bills Taxation
Algeria X X X X X
Argentina X X X
Bolivia X X X X
Chile X*
China X X X X
Dominican Republic X X X X
Egypt X X X X
Ghana X X X X X
India X X X X
Indonesia X X X
Iran X X X X X
Jordan X X X X
Lebanon X X X X X
Malaysia X X X X
Mexico X X X X X X
Morocco X X X X
Pakistan X X X X
Syria X X X X
Tunisia X X X X
Yemen X X X X
* - some consumer subsidies applied only in case of poor households (like in the case of Chile for example)
Source: Nikoloski (2012), Dansie et al (2010), 
Table 2: Instruments for Energy Subsidies
Provision of Goods and services= Government-owned energy minerals; royalty relief or reduction sin taxes on extraction; Government owned 
natural resources or land; Government owned infrastructure; Government purchase or provision of goods or services at non-market prices
Income or Price Support= Regulated prices at above or below market prices; Consumption mandates such as fixed consumption shares for total 
energy use; Trade restrictions; Regulatory loopholes
Notes:
Producer Subsidies Consumer Subsidies
Direct and Indirect Transfers= Direct spending (e.g., R&D support, Earmarks etc); Government Ownership of Energy-related enterprises; 
Government Loans and Loan Guarantees, subsidised credit, Government loans and loan guarantees
Tax exemptions and breaks= Foregone tax revenues due to exemptions etc; Lower marginal tax rates for energy sector; exemptions from excise 
taxes
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Oil and Gas prices; 2000-2012 
Source Natural Commodities prices, IMF. 
 43 
 
  
Figure 2: Oil, Coal, Gas and Electricity Subsidies/GDP; 2007-2009 
Source: IEA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 3: Diesel, Kerosene and Gasoline Subsidies/GDP, 2002-2008 
Source: IMF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 4: Energy Subsidies and Institutional Quality 
Source: Kaufmann and IEA 
 
 46 
 
Figure 5: Energy subsidies and Institutional Quality, 2002-2009 
Source: Kaufmann and IMF 
 
 
 
 
 
 47 
 
Figure 6: Political Systems and Institutional Quality  
Source: Kaufmann and PolityIV
`    Figure 7: Political players, institutions and constraints in pluralistic systems 
                  Constraints                                           Political players and institutions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT 
• National 
• Regional 
POLITICAL PARTIES 
ELECTORAL CYCLE 
• National 
• Regional 
ELECTORAL SYSTEM 
• Majoritarian 
• Proportional 
VOTERS 
PARTY 
FUNDING 
LOBBIES 
• Industries 
• Sectors 
• Regions 
VOTER PREFERENCES 
• Communications 
• Feedback 
• Transparency 
MACROECONOMIC 
• Fiscal  
• Current Account 
INSTITUTIONAL 
CAPACITY 
DELIVERY 
SYSTEMS 
DELIVERY 
SYSTEMS 
TARGETING 
POOR 
UNCONDITIONAL 
CASH TRANSFERS 
CONDITIONAL 
CASH TRANSFERS 
SCALABILITY 
NON-POOR 
TRANSITIONAL 
TRANSFERS 
 49 
Figure 8. Political players, institutions and constraints in autocracies 
 
Constraints                                                                                                                                    Political players and institutions 
 
 
DED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT 
• National 
• Regional 
INFORMATION 
• Communication 
• Feedback 
• Transparency 
CITIZENS 
LOBBIES 
• Industries 
• Regions 
• Sectors 
• Family/Cronies 
CAPTIVE PARTIES 
MACROECONOMIC 
• Fiscal 
• Current account 
INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY 
DELIVERY SYSTEMS DELIVERY SYSTEMS 
POOR NON-POOR 
UNCONDITIONAL 
CASH TRANSFERS 
CONDITIONAL 
CASH TRANSFERS 
SCALABILITY 
TRANSITIONAL 
TRANSFERS 
CREDIBILITY 
• Legitimacy 
`Box 1: Country data checklist 
Profile of Energy Subsidies 
  
Type of Energy subsidies (aggregate and by type of energy) 
 Oil products 
 Gas 
 Electricity 
 Other….. 
 
Instruments 
 Tariff setting  
 Price caps  
 Tax reductions/exemptions 
 Limits on market access 
 Consumer cross-subsidies 
 Other……. 
 
Institutions/Rules for energy pricing 
  Presidency 
  Ministries 
  Independent agency 
Rules/timing in energy price setting 
 
Fiscal profile 
Fiscal cost of energy subsidies (disaggregated) 
Fiscal authority & competences 
  Federal 
  Sub-national 
Composition of spending (including social sectors) 
Composition of revenues  
 
Incidence analysis for energy consumption 
Households, firms and sectors 
  
 
 
 51 
Box 2: Country data checklist 
Motivation and Outcomes 
 
Objectives                      Indicators         Announced/Actual Outcomes 
1. Temporary Income Buffering  
2. Lobbying/Rent Capture 
3. Sharing national patrimony 
4. Boosting exports 
5. Increasing diversity in supply  
6. Lowering income poverty 
7. Raising access to energy 
    (e.g., for particular groups)  
8. Other…… 
 
Box 3: Country data checklist 
Political and Institutional Features 
 
Loci & structure of decision making 
Centralised/De-centralised 
Presidential/Parliamentary 
Plurality/Proportional 
Turnover/Contestability 
   Electoral cycle 
Autocrat/Court 
Political Competition 
Political Participation 
Judiciary independence 
Party funding 
 
Institutional capacity & coverage 
Transfer programmes 
    Conditional Cash Transfers 
    Unconditional Cash Transfers 
Labour Market programmes 
    Unemployment insurance 
    Severance 
    Training  
    Public employment programmes 

