 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.druid.dk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRUID Working Paper No. 10-22 
 
 
Entrepreneurial Experiments in Science Policy:  
Analyzing the Human Genome Project 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By  
 
Kenneth G. Huang and Fiona E. Murray 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
www.druid.dk 
 
Entrepreneurial Experiments in Science Policy: 
Analyzing the Human Genome Project  
 
Kenneth G. Huang 
Assistant Professor of Management 
Singapore Management University 
Lee Kong Shian School of Business 
50 Stamford Road #05-01, Singapore, 178899 
Tel: +(65) 5717-0525 
E-mail: kennethhuang@smu.edu.sg
 
Fiona E. Murray 
Associate Professor of Management 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Sloan School of Management 
50 Memorial Drive E52-567, Cambridge, MA 02142 
Tel: (617)258-0628 
E-mail: fmurray@mit.edu
 
Accepted for Publication in Research Policy 2010 
39(5):567582 
 
Abstract:  
We re-conceptualize the role of science policy makers, envisioning and illustrating their move from 
being simple investors in scientific projects to entrepreneurs who create the conditions for 
entrepreneurial experiments and initiate them. We argue that reframing science policy around the 
notion of conducting entrepreneurial experiments ? experiments that increase the diversity of 
technical, organizational and institutional arrangements in which scientific research is conducted ? 
can provide policy makers with a wider repertoire of effective interventions. To illustrate the power 
of this approach, we analyze the Human Genome Project (HGP) as a set of successful, 
entrepreneurial experiments in organizational and institutional innovation. While not designed as 
such, the HGP was an experiment in funding a science project across a variety of organizational 
settings, including seven public and one private (Celera) research centers. We assess the major 
characteristics and differences between these organizational choices, using a mix of qualitative 
and econometric analyses to examine their impact on scientific progress. The planning and 
direction of the Human Genome Project show that policy makers can use the levers of 
entrepreneurial experimentation to transform scientific progress, much as entrepreneurs have 
transformed economic progress.  
 
Keywords: Entrepreneurial Experiments; Science Policy; Human Genome Project  
Jel codes:  
ISBN 978- 87-7873-304-7 
 1. Introduction 
The traditional role of science policy has been to establish and allocate government funding of 
scientific research.  Policy makers within the key funding agencies serve as investors in the 
scientific community.  Rather than simply responding to the supply of scientific projects, they 
use a variety of programmatic structures and research themes to shape both the level and 
direction of scientific progress.  This role is justified by the long-held notion that public R&D 
spending should emphasize support of research in areas that are critically underinvested because 
they are subject to market failures (Bush, 1945; Arrow, 1962).  While funding remains key to 
high levels of scientific output, science policy has recently been subjected to a variety of 
criticisms: observers have argued that the funding agencies are too conservative in their 
investment approach, focusing on a limited number of low-risk research projects (Kolata, 2009; 
Groopman, 2001).  Others have pointed to the funding preferences towards older scientists with 
proven record of productivity thus reducing diversity (Stephan, 2008).  Finally, there is limited 
attention paid to the diversity of the particular organizational and institutional arrangements 
within which scientific research is undertaken (Murray and Stern, 2007; Jones et al., 2008; 
Huang, 2009). Together, these criticisms point to the limited diversity of scientific research.  
This finding underscores the need for science policy makers and scholars to respond to recent 
economic theory that argues for more significant diversity in early stage research (and 
researchers) to ensure that the full landscape of scientific paths is explored and that suggests the 
importance of particular institutional choices in enabling such diversity (Aghion et al., 2008; 
Acemoglu, 2009; Acemoglu et al., 2009; Murray et al., 2009).   
To meet the goal of increasing the diversity of scientific research, researchers and organizational 
arrangements, we argue that the government should re-conceptualize its role in science policy 
from investor to entrepreneur.  Specifically, we suggest that science policy be reframed so that 
its core mission is to seed and support entrepreneurial experiments, encouraging the use of 
diverse technical, individual, organizational and institutional approaches to solve a particular 
problem.  The experimentation perspective on entrepreneurship highlights the power of 
entrepreneurs to initiate a wide variety of economic experiments in the economy in order to 
rapidly learn about the effectiveness of different technologies, market needs and organizational 
arrangements (Rosenberg, 1992; Stern, 2005).  While the government may not undertake all such 
 3
 experiments directly, within the realm of science policy there is strong potential to act as an 
entrepreneur by seeding experiments and focusing proactively on assessing their results from this 
perspective (Greenstein 2007).  Doing so, we argue, would move the government from its more 
typical role as a reactive investor to an entrepreneur that initiates a wide repertoire of effective 
interventions into the scientific community.  With a proactive agenda of learning from the richly 
diverse set of entrepreneurial experiments, the government would also be able to promote the 
broader ?science of science and innovation? or ?science of science management? agenda.  
Implementing this broader agenda requires an understanding of the determinants of scientific 
progress and a more analytic approach to assessing the impact of technical, individual and 
organizational choices on scientific productivity (Lane, 2009).  
In this paper, we illustrate the power of the experimentation approach to shed light on the impact 
of organizational diversity on scientific progress, using a large-scale entrepreneurial experiment 
organized by the U.S. government. While recognizing the benefits of science policy experiments 
ever since the Manhattan project developed the atomic bomb during World War II (Nelson, 
1961), the funding orientation of the U.S. government has not been explicitly characterized as 
government engagement in valuable entrepreneurial experiments that the market alone would not 
provide nor has it been analyzed as such. In particular, by viewing each of the parallel scientific 
paths sponsored by government agencies (including those under the auspices of the Small 
Business Innovation Research (SBIR)) as an ?experiment? provides a framework for analyzing 
how a particular scientific challenge can be more or less effectively accomplished using a variety 
of different technical and organizational choices. This in turn deepens our understanding of the 
link between organizational arrangements and scientific productivity.   
The entrepreneurial experiment we explore in this paper is the Human Genome Project (HGP), 
(or more precisely the Human Genome Projects) funded by the United States Department of 
Energy (DOE)1 and the National Institutes of Health (NIH)2 , as well as the Wellcome Trust in 
                                                 
1 After the atomic bomb was developed and used, the U.S. Congress charged DOE's predecessor agencies (the 
Atomic Energy Commission and the Energy Research and Development Administration) with studying and 
analyzing genome structure, replication, damage, and repair and the consequences of genetic mutations, especially 
those caused by radiation and chemical by-products of energy production. From these studies grew the recognition 
that the best way to study these effects was to analyze the entire human genome to obtain a reference sequence. 
Planning began in 1986 for DOE's Human Genome Program and in 1987 for the National Institutes of Health's 
 4
 the United Kingdom.  While typically regarded as one monolithic science project, in fact this 
massive effort to sequence the entire human genome was carried out in seven public research 
centers each with different organizational arrangements.  Moreover, about eight years after the 
public Projects? initiation, start-up Celera Genomics began a separate, privately funded quest to 
complete a full genome sequence, using an alternative technical approach and carried out with an 
entirely distinctive organizational model: both the organization of the work and the institutions 
governing data access contrasted sharply with the public Projects.  
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2 we provide a deeper understanding 
of the nature of entrepreneurial experiments and their application to science policy.  In Section 3 
we then use this framework to describe the Human Genome Project(s) as an entrepreneurial 
experiment.  In Section 4 we analyze the impact of different organizational choices on the 
productivity of the different HGP groups illustrating the potential for program evaluation of 
different experiments.  In Section 5 we provide a broader framework for the design and 
evaluation of economic experiments in the science policy setting. 
2. Economic experimentation 
 
We are all familiar with the central role of scientific experimentation in the pursuit of technical 
progress; it has become a foundational tenet of progress (Merton 1966) not least because even 
with the most detailed theoretical models, it is rarely possible to predict ex ante the most 
appropriate research line an advance of an experiment. While scientific or technical experiments 
are widely understood, economic experiments are harder to envision.  An economic experiment 
can be defined as the choice of a particular combination of technical, market and economic 
characteristics that form the basis of an opportunity that will hopefully create value and 
                                                                                                                                                             
program. The DOE-NIH U.S. Human Genome Project formally began October 1, 1990, after the first joint 5-year 
plan was written and a memorandum of understanding was signed between the two organizations. 
2 The National Institutes of Health (NIH), founded in 1887, is one of the world's premier medical research centers, 
and the federal focal point for medical research in the U.S.  The NIH, comprising 27 separate Institutes and Centers, 
is one of eight health agencies of the Public Health Service which, in turn, is part of the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services. The primary mission of NIH is to ?acquire new knowledge to help prevent, detect, diagnose, 
and treat disease and disability, from the rarest genetic disorder to the common cold?[and] to uncover new 
knowledge that will lead to better health for everyone.?  By its key involvement in the HGP, NIH works toward that 
mission and advances human health by ?conducting research in its own laboratories; supporting the research of non-
Federal scientists in universities, medical schools, hospitals, and research institutions throughout the country and 
abroad; helping in the training of research investigators; and fostering communication of medical and health 
sciences information.? 
 5
 economic gain (Rosenberg 1992).  With our focus on experiments designed to increase the 
degree of scientific productivity (rather than on economic value per se), we use the term 
entrepreneurial experiment because as Stern (2005, p. 16) notes, ?While economic experiments 
can be (and are) implemented in established companies (and can even be found in the public 
sector), economic experimentation is at the heart of the entrepreneurial process.? Thus we can 
consider experiments in science policy as key entrepreneurial experiments. 
 
In the realm of science policymaking and the allocation of government research funding, we 
argue for the critical importance of entrepreneurial experiments expanding, varying and testing 
the causal impact of different technical, organizational and institutional arrangements on the 
creation of scientific value.  This follows from the view that experimentation should focus not 
only on generating information about the best technical path but also determine the best 
organizational or institutional approach ? in much the same way that companies experiment with 
the most effective market application or business configuration (Greenstein, 2007).   The analogy 
is simple: scientists might use economic experiments to reduce the uncertainty about the way in 
which particular factors increase or decrease their probability of success.  These factors can 
involve particular combinations of technical approaches, but they can and should also be 
organizational.  Although some argue that science cannot be ?managed? and is a black box inside 
which ?unmanageable? individuals ply their craft, evidence suggests that specific interventions 
in organization, incentives, governance do in fact shape scientific productivity as do broader 
institutional interventions such as ownership, sharing and exchange (Furman and Stern 2006; 
Henderson and Cockburn, 1994; Murray and Stern, 2007; Huang and Murray, in press; Huang, 
2009).  If these interventions do in fact shape the outcome of scientific projects, then 
opportunities for economic experiments abound well beyond the traditional technical domain.  
The government is well placed to serve as an entrepreneur in seeding and promoting these 
experiments, thus increasing the diversity of scientific research along many dimensions.   
 
Entrepreneurial experiments are of potentially significant value because, as Rosenberg (1992, p. 
181) has persuasively argued, ?The freedom to conduct experiments is essential to any society 
that has a serious commitment to technological innovation or to improved productive 
efficiency?.Only the opportunity to try out alternatives, with respect both to technology and to 
 6
 form and size of organization, can produce socially useful answers to a bewildering array of 
questions that are continually occurring in industrial (and in industrializing) societies.? By 
creating the conditions for economic experimentation (by entrepreneurs and others), this 
approach also has the potential to drive much greater technical, market and organizational 
diversity into the innovation system.  For example, early entrepreneurs providing Internet 
services engaged in a variety of market experiments and in organizational experiments around 
how to construct the value chain for effective competitive advantage (Greenstein, 2007), and 
similar patterns of experimentation appeared among early dot-com start-ups (Goldfarb et al., 
2007).   Even among those attempting to monetize and seek economic value based on the early 
developments in biotechnology we see a wide range of market, organizational and institutional 
experiments (Kaplan and Murray, in press).  
 
While entrepreneurs have high incentives to engage in economic experiments, recent economic 
theory has argued that current incentive systems push scientists to follow a too narrow set of 
potential paths or research lines (Acemoglu, 2009), leading to insufficient diversity in the scope 
of early stage R&D projects.  This gap in experimentation suggests a potentially important role 
for science policy makers within the government (as well as not-for-profits) to serve as 
entrepreneurs, creating the conditions for economic experiments linked not simply to immediate 
value-creating outcomes but also to the productivity of scientific knowledge.  Such diversity and 
experimentation must highlight not only the technical dimension experimentation but also along 
the market and organizational dimensions.  Such an approach is particularly salient in R&D 
because, as a highly risky endeavor subject to uncertainty in outcomes (Nelson, 1959), it requires 
government effort to ensure the appropriate level investment in R&D. It also suggests that 
government explicitly view themselves as providing diverse types of investment that the market 
would not otherwise provide (Nelson, 1961).   
 
Government efforts at parallel R&D funding are not entirely new.  As Nelson (1961, p.353) 
quoted in his paper on parallel research, when James Conant wrote to Vanevaar Bush in 1942 
regarding the parallel experimental approaches to the Manhattan Project ?All five methods will 
be entering very expensive pilot plant development during the next six months. . . . [But] while 
all five methods now appear to be about equally promising, clearly the time to production . . . by 
 7
 the five routes will certainly not be the same but might vary by six months or a year because of 
un- foreseen delays. Therefore, if one discards one or two or three of these methods now, one 
may be betting on the slower horse unconsciously."   
 
More contemporary examples of current government efforts in furthering experimentation 
include the SBIR Program (see Link and Scott in this volume for a thorough analysis of 
experiments in this program) and a variety of competition-based procurement processes such as 
the Advanced Technology Program (Link and Scott, 2001) now transformed into the Technology 
Innovation Program.  For example, the 2009 Technology Innovation Program (TIP) competition 
held by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) highlighted, among 
other areas, a competition for proposals ?accelerating the incorporation of materials advances 
into manufacturing processes? (National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2009). This 
requires a variety of organizational approaches including diverse collaborations and partnerships.  
Similarly, the recent the surge of interest in R&D prizes by the government also provides another 
potential mechanism for diversity and experimentation along a variety of dimensions (Horrobin, 
1986; Kalil, 2006). 
 
While these specific examples hint at the government?s potentially powerful role in shaping 
entrepreneurial experiments, a framework for the consistent and thorough analysis of these 
experiments is missing.  In the realm of R&D and the funding of scientific research projects, we 
argue that the government has an important opportunity to structure its experimentation along 
three key dimensions: technical, individual and organizational.  By widening the scope of 
approaches to a particular research challenge, critical diversity can be introduced into the system 
and experimentation can entail exploring multiple lines research (Murray et al., 2009).  Such 
efforts can potentially overcome strong criticism directed towards government funding agencies 
for their low-risk, conservative approach towards funding of research in areas such as cancer 
(Kolata, 2009; Groopman, 2001).  In addition, by broadening the range of individuals and 
organizations participating in R&D and receiving funding, such as through new investigator 
programs or collaborative approaches, individual diversity can also contribute to experimentation 
(Jones et al., 2008).  Lastly, as Foray (2000, p.1) has noted, ?policy makers must themselves be 
willing to experiment with new institutional arrangements,? reminding us that entrepreneurial 
 8
 experiments undertaken in the policy domain should attend to the diversity of organizational 
forms (Stern, 2005).  By more explicitly experimenting with the organization of research, the 
government can add variety of a different sort, one that reflects the growing variety of 
organizational approaches to the kind of creative work that is coming to dominate our economy 
(Bechky and Hargadon, 2007).  Specifically, while some evidence exists that particular 
organizational choices are correlated with more productive scientific outcomes, the current range 
of organizational experiments is limited.  Likewise, with regards to institutional arrangements, 
heated debate has arisen over the role of IP rights governing particular aspects of scientific 
knowledge (Heller and Eisenberg, 1998; Walsh et al., 2005; Murray and Stern, 2007; Huang and 
Murray, in press) suggesting that institutional experimentation must continue.  However, in the 
absence of more carefully designed entrepreneurial experiments followed by careful analysis, we 
cannot have definitive answers that allow for thorough policy guidance.  We illustrate the value 
of entrepreneurial experimentation in the area of scientific research by examining the sequencing 
of the entire human genome in the context of distinctive organizational and institutional choices.  
Although these choices are not as fully documented as one might prefer in a consciously 
designed experiment (and have not been assessed using recent advances in program evaluation), 
we capture and analyze their impact on a variety of outcome measures. These measures include 
commercialization activities, technology transfer decisions and broad impact, as well as 
measures of knowledge production, its diffusion, accumulation and translation into commercial 
outcomes.   
 
3. The Human Genome Project as an entrepreneurial experiment 
?
 
3.1. Organization of the Human Genome Project and historical overview  
The Human Genome Project was a 13-year, $3.8 billion research effort funded and coordinated 
by the U.S. Department of Energy and the National Institutes of Health.  It was also the most 
expensive and arguably the most significant life science research project undertaken in the 
history of U.S science. The human genome is the entirety of hereditary information of Homo 
sapiens, stored in 23 chromosome pairs and contains approximately 23,688 protein-coding genes. 
The explicit goals of the HGP were to identify all 23,688 genes in the human DNA, sequence its 
3 billion nucleotide base pairs (adenine, guanine, cytosine, thymine abbreviated as A, G, C, T 
 9
 respectively), store this information, develop the methods and tools for data analyses and transfer 
related technologies to the private sector.   The HGP grew from an ambitious idea in the minds 
of scientists, legislators and government agencies to a set of landmark scientific achievements 
that redefined the life sciences landscape, gaining broader public support along the way. It 
culminated in the successful sequencing and publication of the draft sequence of the human 
genome in 2001 and the complete sequence in 2003.3
 
As an entrepreneurial experiment organized by the government, the different stakeholders that 
comprised the HGP exemplified the diversity in talent, approach and organization. The seven 
major public genome centers, led by the U.S.-based Whitehead Institute for Genome Research at 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge Massachusetts, and the Wellcome Trust 
Sanger Institute in Cambridgeshire, U.K., also included Washington University Genome 
Sequencing Center in St. Louis Missouri, Baylor Human Genome Sequencing Center in Houston 
Texas, University of Washington Genome Center in Seattle Washington, Stanford Human 
Genome Center in Palo Alto California, and the Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute. 
These centers made up the main thrust of the public effort by completing altogether more than 
99% of the sequencing. The private effort was spearheaded by Celera Genomics, which started 
competing against the public project in 1998. While these centers all engaged in aspects of the 
same overall project, they differed in their origins, organizational characteristics, size, talent pool, 
and incentives, particularly choices governing disclosure and intellectual property (IP) policies 
which varied sharply between the public and private efforts but even within the public project 
depending on the local institutional rules surrounding intellectual property rights. 
 
Before examining the specific variations along different dimensions of each genome center and 
the competition between the public vs. private sequencing efforts, it is important to first 
understand the major historical and scientific milestones of the HGP and the role of government  
in organizing and funding the genome centers to ensure early completion of this mammoth 
project.  
 
                                                 
3 DOE Major Timeline: http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/project/timeline.shtml
 10
 The first serious push to sequence the human genome began in 1984, when Robert Sinsheimer, a 
distinguished molecular biologist and senior administrator at the University of California, 
proposed to the University of California President David Gardner that an institute be established  
for this purpose on the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) campus.  Although the 
proposal was not funded, Sinsheimer continued the discussion with other molecular biologists at 
UCSC then including Harry Noller, Robert Edgar, and Robert Ludwig. 
 
Sinsheimer held a meeting of researchers in UCSC in May 1985, proposing that the entire human 
genome should not only be mapped with scattered but specific ?road-markers?, but also 
sequenced to determine the order of each A, G, C and T.  A number of distinguished biologists 
active in genetics and gene mapping were present during the meeting, including Harry Noller, 
now the Sinsheimer Professor of Molecular Biology at UCSC; geneticist David Botstein, now 
the director of the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics at Princeton University; Leroy 
Hood, now the President of the Institute for Systems Biology in Seattle; and the 1980 Nobel 
laureate in Chemistry, Walter Gilbert of Harvard University, who later became an enthusiastic 
advocate of this notion.  At around the same period of time, other scientists made independent 
proposals for the sequencing of the human genome, notably Renato Dulbecco of the Salk 
Institute and Charles DeLisi of the U.S. DOE.    
 
The proposal seemed idealistic and almost logistically impossible (Lander and Weinberg, 
2000) ? the human genome encompasses about 3 billion bases of DNA and the technology then 
only allowed reading lengths of about 300 bases in each analysis.  Decades of work by a huge 
number of research scientists and technicians would be required to perform and complete the job.  
In addition, analysis of a single base would cost over $10 at that time and it often required more 
than a day to sequence 50 to 100 bases.  Such suggestion to sequence the genome then was not 
only ambitious but also prohibitively expensive.  
 
Furthermore, opponents argued that sequencing the human genome would be a vast waste of 
effort as majority of it, maybe as high as 95%, does not encode useful protein or regulatory 
information, known as ?junk DNA?.  Such enormous effort to obtain detailed sequence 
 11
 information about DNA, as they argue, would have little hope of shedding useful insight into 
biological function.  However, the proposal prevailed.    
 
From early 1986, the government officially started a series of important initiatives and meetings 
to organize this major effort. From the Office of Health and Environmental Research (OHER) of 
U.S. DOE,4 (now the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER)), biophysicist and 
administrator Charles DeLisi5 joined David A. Smith6, director of the DOE Human Genome 
Program, to organize and hold a conference in Santa Fe.  The goal of the meeting, a follow-up to 
the previous Santa Cruz meeting, was to assess the feasibility of a human genome initiative and 
the role of DOE in sequencing the entire human genome,. Following the Santa Fe conference, 
OHER of DOE, announced the Human Genome Initiative.  With $5.3 million, pilot projects first 
began at DOE national laboratories to develop critical technologies and resources.  Three 
genome research centers were established between 1988 and 1989 at Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory (LBNL), Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), and Los 
Alamos National Laboratory (LANL). 
 
Legislation to begin planning a mammoth project, resulting in a detailed analysis of all the genes 
in the human body, was introduced in the Senate in December 1987, sponsored by Senator Pete 
Domenici (R-N.M.), Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), Lawton Chiles (D-Fla.), Patrick J. Leahy 
(D-Vt.) and Bob Graham (D-Fla.).  The bill focused on establishing a freestanding National 
Biotechnology Policy Board and Advisory Panel in order to ensure a high level of 
competitiveness for the biotechnology industry in the U.S.; these groups would foster policies to  
?enhance the efficient and timely advance of basic and applied biotechnology-related research?.  
                                                 
4 After the atomic bomb was developed and used, the U.S. Congress charged DOE's predecessor agencies (the 
Atomic Energy Commission and the Energy Research and Development Administration) with studying and 
analyzing genome structure, replication, damage, and repair and the consequences of genetic mutations, especially 
those caused by radiation and chemical by-products of energy production. From these studies grew the recognition 
that the best way to study these effects was to analyze the entire human genome to obtain a reference sequence. 
Planning began in 1986 for DOE's Human Genome Program and in 1987 for the National Institutes of Health's 
program. The DOE-NIH U.S. Human Genome Project formally began October 1, 1990, after the first joint 5-year 
plan was written and a memorandum of understanding was signed between the two organizations.  
5 DeLisi, Charles (July 2001). ?Genomes: 15 Years Later. A Perspective by Charles DeLisi, HGP Pioneer.? Human 
Genome News, Vol.11, No. 3-4. 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v11n3/05delisi.shtml
6 Smith, David A. (September-December 1995). ?Evolution of a Vision: Genome Project Origins, Present and 
Future Challenges, and Far-Reaching Benefits?. Human Genome News, 7(3-4): 2. 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v7n3/02smithr.shtml
 12
 The bill also centered on a huge project to map and sequence the human genome.  However, the 
bill only authorized enough funds to support the Board through 1993 (The Washington Post, 
1987).   
 
In the same year, congressionally chartered DOE advisory committee, Health and Environmental 
Research Advisory Committee (HERAC),7 boldly recommended a 15-year, multidisciplinary, 
scientific, and technological undertaking to map and sequence the human genome.  DOE also 
designated important multidisciplinary human genome centers in the U.S. that year, including the 
Whitehead Institute for Genome Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Washington 
University School of Medicine Genome Sequencing Center, and University of Washington 
Genome Center. National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at National Institutes 
of Health started funding the genome projects that year.  
 
In 1988, congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) and National Academy of 
Sciences (NAS) National Research Council (NRC) committees recommended a concerted 
genome research program.  Over the next year, DOE and NIH held several other meetings and 
independent hearings by OTA and by NAS to discuss the plans for the HGP. Also in the same 
year, the Human Genome Organization (HUGO)8 was founded by scientists to coordinate efforts 
internationally.  The first annual Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory meeting on human genome 
mapping and sequencing was also held. That year, Congress funded both the DOE and the NIH 
to start further exploration of the human genome, and DOE and NIH signed a formal 
Memorandum of Understanding (U.S. Department of Energy, 1990a), which outlined plans for 
cooperation on genome research to ?coordinate research and technical activities related to the 
human genome?. 
  
These activities and the reports published culminated in 1988 when the government established 
the Genome Office at the National Institutes of Health and appointed Nobelist James Watson as 
its head (The Washington Post, 1989). This subsequently became the National Center for Human 
Genome Research (NCHGR) in October 1989 by Congressional authorization to carry out the 
                                                 
7 http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/project/herac2.shtml
8 http://www.gene.ucl.ac.uk/hugo/ 
 13
 role of NIH in the HGP. NCHGR was created to support the development of resources and 
technology that would accelerate genome research and its application to human health.  In 1997, 
the NCHGR at NIH was restructured and renamed the National Human Genome Research 
Institute (NHGRI) by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to allow 
NHGRI to operate under the same legislative authorities as other NIH research institutes.  It 
became one of the 27 institutes and centers that make up of NIH.  Advisory boards were created 
to serve both the NIH and DOE.9  Meetings were held twice annually on succeeding days since 
several committees were "joint", especially the one on data (Joint Informatics Task Force).  
 
In 1989, the biology community called for a $3 billion project to identify and decipher each of 
the (then) estimated 30,000 genes that were understood to govern the form and function of the 
human body (Chicago Sunday Times, 1989).10  The largest funding agency of such activities, 
NHGRI, was funded yearly through Congressional appropriation through a standard budget 
process.11  In turn, the NHGRI was guided by a series of five-year plans outlining the priorities 
and goals of the project.  These plans detailed the objectives of the program to the scientific 
community and informed the public while ensuring measurable aims to steer the work and 
determine NHGRI?s progress.  In allocating funds, NHGRI published its areas of research 
interest in program announcements so that individual scientists or academic institutions, non-
profit organizations, community hospitals and companies could apply for research funding.  A 
two-tier, peer-review process evaluated all applications and NHGRI funded the highest ranked 
                                                 
9 http://www.genome.gov/10000905 
10 The Human Genome Project is sometimes reported to have a cost of about $3 billion.  However, this figure refers 
to the total projected funding over a 13-year period (1990?2003) for a wide range of scientific activities related to 
genomics.  These include studies of human diseases, experimental organisms (such as bacteria, yeast, worms, flies, 
and mice); development of new technologies for biological and medical research; computational methods to analyze 
genomes; and ethical, legal, and social issues related to genetics.  Human genome sequencing represents only a 
small fraction of the overall 13-year budget.  
11 Every year, the President submits a budget request for the entire federal government to Congress, which then 
conducts hearings on that budget request.  Different committees have the authority to approve specific sections of 
the federal budget. Representatives of NHGRI testify before the House and Senate subcommittees on Labor; Health 
and Human Services; Education; and related agencies, where Congress is updated on the accomplishments, needs 
and opportunities of NHGRI. Congress also hears testimony from public witnesses such as experts in genetic 
research, or representatives of genetic disease advocacy groups.  
After listening to the testimony, the House of Representatives determines a funding level for NHGRI and sends its 
recommendation to the Senate. After the Senate conducts hearings, both bodies of Congress meet to agree on 
funding levels for all of the institutes and centers of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), including NHGRI. 
Congress then sends an appropriation bill with the recommended funding levels to the President. After the President 
signs the budget, NHGRI receives its funding.  
See http://www.house.gov/rules/budget_pro.htm and http://www.genome.gov/10000933 
 14
 proposals that were within the program priorities. 12  NHGRI eventually funded the various 
genome centers in the U.S..13       
 
These events culminated in the 5-year U.S. Human Genome Project (HGP) plan jointly presented 
by DOE and NIH to the Congress in 1990. The report scrutinized the present state of genome 
science and detailed the complementary approaches of the two agencies for attaining scientific 
goals, while laying out concrete plans for governing research agendas.  The report also explained 
the collaborative effort among U.S. and international agencies and presented the budget of 
??about $200 million per year for approximately 15 years? (U.S. Department of Energy, 1990b). 
The estimated 15-year project formally began in that year.  Several projects had already begun to 
mark gene sites on chromosome maps as sites of mRNA expression, while research and 
development were also underway for efficient production of more stable, large-insert Bacterial 
Artificial Chromosomes (BACs), which were essential tools for constructing genomic maps.14  
The promise and benefits of the now formalized Human Genome Project started to receive wider 
media attention in major newspapers and magazines such as the Washington Post (1990), the 
Wall Street Journal (1990) and Business Week (1990). 
 
In 1991, the human chromosome mapping data repository, Genome Database (GDB), 15  an 
international collaboration in support of the human genome project, was established.  RTI 
International, a prominent research institute located in the Research Triangle Park in North 
Carolina, hosted it. During the same period, the technology and science were improving 
dramatically to produce high cost reduction in sequencing efforts. For example, the cost of 
sequencing 10,000 bases in a single day has dropped to about a dollar a base (Hunkapiller et al, 
1991). By 1993, many laboratories concurrently used robotic analyzers to sequence 500,000 
bases daily and they cost about $0.10 to $0.15 a base. 
                                                 
12 NHGRI Budget and Financial Information, 2004. http://www.genome.gov/10000933
13 For example, the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Medical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, received 
approximately $35 million from the NHGRI of NIH, to participate in the first year of the full-scale effort to 
sequence the human genome. NHGRI also funded Washington University Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor 
College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center, University of Washington Genome Center, and the 
Stanford Human Genome Center. In contrast, the Sanger Institute in the U.K. is funded primarily by the Wellcome 
Trust. 
14 Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes (BACs) comprised one of the most utilized resources . 
15 http://www.gdb.org/
 15
 The ensuing years saw continued and promising development and improvement of resources, 
technologies and scientific techniques, and optimism for the potential for commercialization of 
the human genome sequences (Business Week, 1992).  In 1992, low-resolution genetic linkage 
map of entire human genome was published.  The guidelines for data release and resource 
sharing of the human genome project were also announced by DOE and NIH to encourage data 
and resource sharing (U.S. Department of Energy, 1993).  
 
In 1993, the international Integrated Molecular Analysis of Gene Expression (IMAGE) 
Consortium was established to coordinate efficient mapping and sequencing of gene-representing 
cDNAs (U.S. Department of Energy, 1995a).  The consortium produced highly cited scientific 
papers that made significant contribution to the progress of the Human Genome Project (The 
Scientist, 1999).  At the same time, DOE and NIH revised their initial 5-year plan for the Human 
Genome Project due to rapid advances in genome research and more in-depth understanding of 
how to attain long-term objectives (Collins and Galas, 1993). In terms of technology advances, 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) of DOE implemented a novel transposon-
mediated chromosome-sequencing system while Gene Recognition and Analysis Internet Link 
(GRAIL) sequence-interpretation service maintained by Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) 
of DOE started to provide Internet access. 16  
 
1994 brought in encouraging news that the genetic-mapping 5-year goal presented by DOE and 
NIH was achieved one year ahead of schedule (U.S. Department of Energy, 1994). The second-
generation DNA clone libraries representing each human chromosome were also completed that 
same year by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory (LBNL).   
 
In terms of scientific breakthroughs, LANL and LLNL respectively announced in 1995 the 
completion of high-resolution physical maps of chromosome 16 and 19 (U.S. Department of 
Energy, 1995b). Moderate-resolution maps of chromosomes 3, 11, 12, and 22 maps were also 
published (U.S. Department of Energy, 1995c). Research led by scientists from the MIT 
Whitehead Institute Center for Genome Research and Genethon revealed and published the 
                                                 
16 http://genome.ornl.gov/ 
 16
 physical map of the human genome with more than 15,000 sequence tagged site (STS) markers 
(U.S. Department of Energy, 1996a).   
 
In 1996, DOE and National Center for Human Genome Research (NCHGR) at National 
Institutes of Health issued human subject guidelines for large-scale sequencing projects (U.S. 
Department of Energy, 1996b). Another landmark event that occurred during that year is the 
large-scale sequencing strategy meeting for international coordination of human genome 
sequencing in Bermuda held from 25 to 28 February, 1996. It was sponsored by the Wellcome 
Trust, U.K. Medical Research Council. About 50 scientists from countries publicly supporting 
large-scale human genome sequencing attended the conference. The conference was designed to 
coordinate, compare, and evaluate human genome mapping and sequencing strategies; consider 
the potential role of new technologies in sequencing and informatics; and discuss scenarios for 
data release.  A consensus was reached that the eventual sequencing outcome representing the 
first human genome sequence should be conducted at a high degree of accuracy. 
 
Participants (participating organizations and funding agencies) in the HGP agreed on sequencing 
data release policy at the Second International Strategy Meeting on Human Genome Sequencing 
in 1997.17  That year, in order to implement high-throughput activities, DOE also formed the 
Joint Genome Institute (JGI), an effort to tie the expertise and resources in genome mapping, 
DNA sequencing, technology development, and information sciences pioneered at DOE genome 
centers: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory (LLNL), and Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) by forming).  The institute 
would start with sequencing and functional genomics (U.S. Department of Energy, 1996c).  
 
3.2. Private Celera Genomics versus public Human Genome Sequencing Consortium 
June 1998 marked the moment when a true market-driven entrepreneurial experiment joined the 
previously government dominated efforts in human genome sequencing; a competing private 
quest to sequence the human genome was launched by Celera Genomics (co-founded by Applera 
                                                 
17 Held in Bermuda from 27th February 1997 to 2nd March 1997. 
 17
 Corporation (then called PE Corporation) and Dr. J. Craig Venter).18 The effort was also headed 
by Venter19 who had been a scientist at the NIH during the early 1990s, when the HGP was 
started, .  He left NIH to start the Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) in 1992, which led the 
first successful sequencing of an entire organism?s genome (Haemophilus influenzae bacterium). 
Celera?s mission was to generate and commercialize genomic information.  Specifically, it aimed 
to sequence the entire human genome and provide its putative clients, pharmaceutical and 
biotechnology companies,  with early access to the resulting data. The firm aimed to complete 
the sequencing of the human genome at a faster pace (within three years) and at a fraction of the 
cost of the publicly funded project ($300 million vs. $3 billion). Figure 1 illustrates the 
organization of the HGP, mapping the relationship among the key stakeholders and competitors. 
------------------------------- 
Insert Figure 1 about here 
---------------------------------- 
 
When Celera entered the competition, more than eight years into the Human Genome Project, it 
had the advantage of freely obtaining the existing publicly available data from GenBank (nearly 
one-third of the human genome sequence in finished or draft form), as well as building on the 
technical groundwork laid by the public consortium. Using state-of-the-art sequencing 
technology supplied by Applied Biosystems Group of the Applera Corporation and sophisticated 
internally-developed informatics, it pioneered a technique, whole genome shotgun sequencing, 
that had been used to sequence bacterial genomes of only up to six million base pairs in length,   
far fewer than the three billion base pair human genome. 
 
Collaboration and pooling of efforts with the public consortium would facilitate faster 
completion of the sequencing project, and win Dr. Venter more friends in the academic scientific  
community from which he came. 20  However, this option disappeared, pardly due to rival 
agendas; in particular, there was disagreement about access to sequencing data (Venter refused to 
                                                 
18 Celera Genomics belonged to the Applied Biosystems Group business unit of the Applera Corporation until it was 
spun off in July 2008 to become an independent publicly traded company. 
19 Dr. Craig Venter headed Celera from its founding to early 2002, when he was fired due to a conflict with the main 
investor, Tony White who had also been with the company since its founding. 
20 In fact, according to an interview on November 14, 1999, Dr. Paul Gilman, a senior executive at Celera then, 
commented that Dr. Venter was open to the idea of collaboration with the public consortium but that no specific 
proposal was under discussion. 
 18
 deposit Celera?s data in the unrestricted public database GenBank) and about the direction of the 
project.  
 
In terms of disclosure and IP, Celera initially announced that it would seek patent protection on 
"only 200 to 300" genes, but later amended this to seek ?intellectual property protection? on 
?fully-characterized important structures? (or any commercially valuable DNA sequences) 
amounting to 100 to 300 targets. The firm eventually filed preliminary (?place-holder?) patent 
applications on 6,500 whole or partial genes (BBC News, 1999). In fact, since Celera?s founding 
in 1998 to the completion of the HGP in 2003, it had filed 259 granted genomics, methods and 
tools patents according to the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). Out of 
which, at least 65 patents claimed part of a gene or gene sequences (Jensen and Murray, 2005). 
While the company?s initial policy was to hold back data from sections of the genome they 
sequenced for commercial exploitation, Celera later amended its policy in response to critics and 
promised to publish their findings in accordance with the terms of the 1996 ?Bermuda 
Statement?,21 by releasing new data annually (while the publicly funded HGP released its new 
data daily). Nevertheless, it would not permit free redistribution or commercial use of the data 
and had set a maximum threshold for amount of sequence data a researcher could download at 
any given time, unlike the publicly funded project. Celera also planned to profit from its 
sequencing effort by establishing a value-added database of genomic data that users could 
subscribe to for a fee. Essentially, Celera had incorporated the public data into their genome 
while restricting public use of Celera data. 
 
In March 2000, President Clinton announced that the genome sequence could not be patented, 
and should be made freely available to all researchers (although it was not clear if it was binding). 
The statement sent Celera's stock plummeting and dragged down the biotechnology-heavy 
Nasdaq. The biotechnology sector lost about $50 billion in market capitalization within two days. 
 
The ?working draft? DNA sequence of the human genome was jointly announced in June 2000 
by the HGP leaders Ari Patrinos (director of DOE Human Genome Program and Biological and 
Environmental Research Program) and Francis Collins (director, NIH National Human Genome 
                                                 
21 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bermuda_Principles
 19
 Research Institute), as well as Craig Venter (head of Celera Genomics) and then U.S. president 
Bill Clinton. The International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, led by NHGRI and 
DOE and Celera, soon followed by publishing details of their drafts in February 2001. A special 
issue of Nature (International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, 2001) on 15 February 
2001 published the public consortium?s scientific results one day ahead of Celera?s publication 
in Science (Venter et al., 2001). These papers described the methods used to produce the draft 
sequence and offered analysis of the sequence. These drafts covered about 83% of the genome 
(90% of the euchromatic regions with 150,000 gaps and the order and orientation of many 
segments not yet established). In February 2001, at the time of the joint publications, press 
releases announced that the project had been completed by both groups.  
 
The fierce private versus public competition had spurred the publicly funded genome centers to 
modify their strategy in order to accelerate progress. The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute from 
the public consortium had completed the sequencing of chromosome 20 by 2001.22  This was the 
third (following chromosomes 22 and 21) and the largest of the human chromosomes to be 
completed to the high scientific standard specified by the Human Genome Project. On April 14, 
2003, the public consortium announced the successful completion of the Human Genome Project 
more than two years ahead of schedule (Reuters Health, 2003).23 In the same year, the finished 
sequences of chromosomes 14 (January), 24  Y (June), 25  7 (July) 26  and 6 (October) 27  were 
published. These were followed by the finished sequences of chromosomes 13 28  and 19 29  
published in April 2004. 
   
3.3. The genome centers and their organizational choices governing disclosure and IP 
While the public genome centers within the International Human Genome Sequencing 
Consortium had similar goals ? scientific sequencing and data release standards ? they varied 
along specific dimensions. Table 1 summarizes the key attributes of each of the seven public 
                                                 
22 Nature, December 20, 2001.  
23 Also see: http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/project/50yr/press4_2003.shtml 
24 Nature, January 2003  
25 Nature 423, 810-813 (19 June 2003) 
26 Nature 424, 157-164 (10 July 2003)
27 Nature 425, 805-811 (23 October 2003) 
28 Nature 428, 522-528 (01 April 2004) 
29 Nature 428, 529-535 (01 April 2004)
 20
 genome centers in terms of founding year, leadership, affiliations, percentage of human genome 
sequence completed, chromosomes sequenced, operating budget, funding or employment size.  
------------------------------ 
Insert Table 1 about here 
--------------------------------- 
 
We now focus on the variations in the different organizational choices governing disclosure and 
IP policy for each center. These variations enable a more precise analysis of the economic 
experiment organized by NHGRI and DOE (to be described in the Section 4).  
  
The Whitehead Institute/ MIT Center for Genome Research (WIBR) chose to actively patent and 
license its genome research outputs.  However, it practiced forms of data release in accordance 
with the data release policy endorsed by both the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute and NIH 
(Bentley, 1996).30  This formed an interesting and contrasting variation with most of the other 
genome centers in terms of how it governed information disclosure, production and 
dissemination of scientific knowledge and intellectual property rights for commercialization of 
biotechnologies.    
 
In contrast, the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute was one of the major proponents of the ?no 
patent? policy, believing in the immediate and free release of genomic sequence information to 
the public domain.  This policy (i) permits coordination; (ii) is of immediate value to others and 
is not misleading; and (iii) promotes maximum accessibility of the human genome sequence for 
interpretation and exploitation.  Furthermore, the Institute believes that such ?activities should 
flourish in both the academic and commercial sectors?.? and ?withholding the genomic 
sequence ingredient from any academic or commercial laboratory with such knowledge impedes 
scientific progress and is not in the international public interest.?  It has taken the stand that 
?patenting of raw human genomic DNA sequence or partial or complete gene sequences of 
unknown function is inappropriate,? as it may ?discourage further research and development by 
others, for fear that future inventions downstream of the gene sequence itself could not be 
adequately protected? Free release of sequence data will also encourage exploitation by a 
                                                 
30 This paper was written on behalf of the Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, 
UK, and Genome Sequencing Center, Washington University, St. Louis. 
 21
 maximum number of commercial and academic centers that are keen to compete in the 
development of new therapeutic agents.? (Bentley, 1996).  This serves as a sharp contrast to the 
patent policy adopted by the Whitehead Institute. 
 
The Washington University Genome Sequencing Center (WUGSC), like the Sanger Institute, was 
a champion of the non-patenting policy on all its HGP research output, believing this choice will 
maximize the dissemination and utilization of knowledge and commercialization (Bentley, 1996). 
On a much smaller scale than the MIT Whitehead Institute, the Baylor College of Medicine 
Human Genome Sequencing Center (BCM-HGSC) selectively patents some of the related 
technologies derived from the sequencing of the human genome.  
 
Although University of Washington Genome Center (UWGC) ?emphasizes innovative 
technology development and high quality sequence production?, it ?decided to not to patent any 
of the sequences and it holds no patents on anything??31  This was in line with the non-
patenting policy of the Sanger Institute and the Washington University Genome Sequencing 
Center. Like most other human genome centers, Stanford Human Genome Center (SHGC) 
follows a non-patenting policy on its HGP research output. Finally, DOE Joint Genome Institute, 
like most its counterparts in the HGP including the SHGC, adopts a rapid disclosure of 
information and non-patenting policy on its HGP research output. 
 
4. Analyzing the Human Genome Project experiments 
 
4.1. Data and Measures  
 
Economic experimentation by government in large-scale scientific projects such as the HGP 
introduces diversity and variety on different dimensions (e.g. talent, approach and disclosure 
incentives) as described in the previous sections. These variations produced by government?s 
experimentation, specifically on organizational disclosure and IP policy, provide an 
?experiment? in which to analyze the impact of a pro-patenting policy vs. full and rapid 
disclosure of scientific knowledge in the genome centers. Table 2 summarizes the organizational 
                                                 
31 According to informal interview with the Computer Support Analyst from the University of Washington Genome 
Center (2003). 
 22
 choices in disclosure and patenting policy of the seven public genome centers vs. private Celera 
Genomics. The Whitehead/MIT Center and Baylor Human Genome Sequencing Center, from the 
public consortium, and the corporate Celera Genomics allowed for patenting.  In contrast, the 
other five public genome centers, namely Sanger Institute (U.K.), Washington University 
Genome Sequencing Center, University of Washington Genome Center, Stanford Human 
Genome Center and DOE Joint Genome Institute, established a full disclosure and strictly no 
patenting policy. 
------------------------------ 
Insert Table 2 about here 
--------------------------------- 
 
These seven public centers provide a matched and well-controlled opportunity to examine the 
impact of patent and disclosure policy on scientific knowledge produced by the genome centers. 
The heterogeneity of genomic research data is reduced by focusing only on knowledge related to 
human genome sequencing. In addition, these centers do not have knowledge ex ante on the 
choice and fruitfulness of the pieces of chromosomes they sequence.  All the public centers, as 
part of the same consortium, follow similar research and publication strategy (although not IP 
and disclosure policy) in the collaborative sequencing of the human genome. 
 
To understand the effects of IP and disclosure policy on knowledge production and 
commercialization by the genome centers, we collected data on all publications, patents and 
commercialization efforts from the HGP by the seven public genome centers as well as private 
Celera Genomics for comparison. Table 3 describes the variables in this study. Table 4 provides 
the summary statistics while Table 5 shows the correlation matrix for the key variables.  
------------------------------ 
Insert Table 3 about here 
--------------------------------- 
------------------------------ 
Insert Table 4 about here 
--------------------------------- 
------------------------------ 
Insert Table 5 about here 
--------------------------------- 
 
 23
 The publication data is obtained from the ISI Web of Science, which provides the most 
comprehensive coverage of peer-reviewed scientific research articles available. These 
publications are cross-checked with the publication records announced by each genome center or 
listed on their website. This yielded a total of 1484 publications from January 1990, the year in 
which the HGP started, to December 2003, the year it ended. The number of publications across 
the seven public genome centers and Celera Genomics shows a generally increasing trend from 
1990 to 2003, all peaking at 2002 or 2003 (with the exception of Baylor which peaked at 1995), 
near or at the completion of the HGP, when most results are published (see Figure 2).  
------------------------------- 
Insert Figure 2 about here 
---------------------------------- 
 
The dependent variable is the number of cumulative forward citations to each scientific 
publication. We use publication citations to each genomic paper (i.e. peer-reviewed publications 
citing the focal paper) as a proxy for the importance of the scientific knowledge in the form of 
follow-on knowledge accumulation. Our citation-based approach follows a long literature using 
citations to trace the flow of ideas and their follow-on accumulation in later knowledge 
production (de Solla Price, 1965; Hall, Jaffe, & Trajtenberg, 2001; Posner, 2000).  
 
The independent variables are paired patent and patenting policy. We recognize in our data the 
presence of a paired patent to a corresponding scientific paper, indicating that the same piece of 
scientific knowledge is captured and disclosed in both the form of a scientific paper and a formal 
patent (which is only possible in a genome center that allows for patenting). This is an important 
feature known as a patent-paper pair (Ducor, 2000; Murray, 2002; Huang and Murray, in press). 
We code paired patent as a binary variable (1 to denote if a scientific paper is matched to a 
patent pair and 0 otherwise). To examine the effect of an organizational policy allowing for 
patenting, we also include patenting policy and code it as a binary variable ? 1 denotes that a 
genome center allows for patents (i.e. Whitehead, Baylor or Celera) and 0 otherwise. 
 
We also include a number of control variables: number of authors, article type (binary variable 1 
to denote if the paper is an article or review and 0 otherwise), journal impact factor (to account 
 24
 for the quality of publication), 32  number of centers (that collaborate on a publication), and 
industry collaboration (binary variable 1 to denote if the paper results from the collaborative 
effort of the genome center and a private firm and 0 if it doesn?t). In addition, we include dummy 
variables for each publication year (to account for unobserved heterogeneity across each 
publication cohort) and for each publication genome center, namely Whitehead, Sanger, 
Washington University, Baylor, University of Washington, Stanford, JGI and Celera, (to account 
for unobserved heterogeneity across each center where the publications come from). Finally, we 
differentiate and control for the knowledge characteristics of the HGP publications in terms of 
the type of research output they capture: (i) specific human gene sequence ? chromosome and 
genes including characterization of different types of genes like disease genes or DNA; (ii) gene 
sequences of other organisms ? mouse, rat, zebrafish, worm, and bacteria, including their disease 
or chromosome-specific characterization; and (iii) techniques, methods or procedures on 
sequencing or sequencing tools including both hardware and software. To do this, we coded the 
following binary variables (1 denoting yes and 0 otherwise) for each publication accordingly: (i) 
specific human gene sequencing; (ii) research on human or application to human; and (iii) 
techniques, methods or tools.  
 
As verification of genome center patent policy and to match a patent to its corresponding paired 
scientific paper, we obtain patent data for the Whitehead/MIT Center, Baylor and Celera 
Genomics from the USPTO, crossed checked by patenting and licensing associates from the 
relevant genome centers. Each patent entry includes patent number; title; inventor names; 
number of inventors; patent publication date; patent publication country; assignee names; 
assignee location; assignee code; patent application number; and patent application date.   
 
In addition, we collect the commercialization data of the Whitehead Institute based on its HGP 
patents from the MIT Technology Licensing Office (TLO). The commercialization data includes 
the number of cases with agreements (including licensing or joint venture); number of cases to 
start-ups; and start-up company names. As an overview, Whitehead Institute generated about 101 
                                                 
32 As the impact factor (and the rank ordering) across the set of journals in our data set is stable over time, we used 
2003, the last paper publication year in our sample. All genome centers (including Celera) have a significant 
proportion (about 13% to 30%) of scientific publications in the top 10 journals (i.e. impact factor greater than 25) 
such as ?Science? and ?Nature?. This speaks to the high quality of research and consistency in publication quality 
across the centers.  
 25
 patents in the period 1990 to 2003, of which 40 belong to genome research; only 12 of the 40  
patnets are specifically related to the human genome project.  They cover a wide range of areas, 
from gene sequencing techniques, technological tools to genes themselves.  Table 6 shows the 
growing trend of patenting activities from 1990 to 2003, including the HGP-related patents.  
------------------------------ 
Insert Table 6 about here 
--------------------------------- 
 
In addition, based on MIT TLO data, there have been more than 60 licenses to these patents, and 
the licensees include Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Ariad Pharmaceuticals, Cell Genesys, Genitrix, 
LLC, Microbia, Inc., Millennium Pharmaceuticals and Noxxon Pharma AG. Whitehead HGP 
technologies have also resulted in biotechnology start-ups such as Agencourt Bioscience, which 
specializes in DNA sequencing and genomic services. 
 
The Whitehead Institute commercialization data covers all the commercialization efforts (beyond 
patents) from the public consortium as Baylor did not have any start-ups based on their patents 
from the HGP until the end of 2003. Together with the complete publication and patent data 
from the genome centers, we have a comprehensive and nuanced data set for our analyses.     
 
4.2. Model specification and estimation 
As the dependent variable, number of cumulative forward citations to a scientific paper is a 
highly right-skewed count variable that takes on non-negative integer values.  We use a 
nonlinear regression approach to avoid heteroskedastic, non-normal residuals (Hausman et al., 
1984). Furthermore, the dependent variable exhibits over-dispersion with conditional variance 
significantly greater than the conditional mean (Cameron and Trivedi, 1998).33 Therefore, we 
choose negative binomial regression models (NBRM) over Poisson regression models in our 
estimation, as NBRM overcomes the problem of over-dispersion by assuming a gamma 
distribution for the conditional mean of the dependent count variable and allows the conditional 
mean and variance to vary.34 This choice is consistent with previous works employing citation 
                                                 
33 This is supported by the likelihood-ratio test where H1: E(yit)<Var(yit).  
34 The use of negative binomial regression model is further supported by the results from the goodness-of-fit test 
which rejected the Poisson distribution assumption. 
 26
 based measures as dependent variables (Zeidonis, 2004; Hoetker and Agarwal, 2007; Murray and 
Stern, 2007; Huang and Murray, in press).35  
 
Based on this, we developed the following specifications. Equation (1) shows the baseline 
specification (with controls only) for the negative binomial regression model with robust 
standard errors estimate:36
 
CFCi = f (?i; ?NUMBER_OF_AUTHORSi + ?ARTICLE_TYPEi  
+ ?JOURNAL_IMPACT_FACTORi + ?NUMBER_OF_CENTERSi  
+ ?INDUSTRY_COLLABORATIONi  
+ ?HGP_OUTPUT_CHARACTERISTICSi)      (1) 
  
From the baseline model, it is possible to develop two further specifications. In addition to the 
baseline controls specified in Equation (1), the marginal effects model in Equation (2) includes 
the independent variables paired patent and patenting policy.  
 
CFCi = f (?i; ?PAIRED_PATENTi + ?PATENTING_POLICYi  
+ ?NUMBER_OF_AUTHORSi + ?ARTICLE_TYPEi 
+?JOURNAL_IMPACT_FACTORi + ?NUMBER_OF_CENTERSi  
+ ?INDUSTRY_COLLABORATIONi  
+ ?HGP_OUTPUT_CHARACTERISTICSi)     (2) 
  
 
Finally, the full fixed-effects negative binomial regression model in Equation (3) incorporates 
both publication year fixed effects and center fixed effects to account for unobserved 
heterogeneities across paper publication cohorts (i.e. each publication year) and across individual 
genome centers, respectively.  
 
CFCi = f (?i; ?PAIRED_PATENTi + ?PATENTING_POLICYi  
+ ?NUMBER_OF_AUTHORSi + ?ARTICLE_TYPEi 
+?JOURNAL_IMPACT_FACTORi + ?NUMBER_OF_CENTERSi  
+ ?INDUSTRY_COLLABORATIONi  
+ ?HGP_OUTPUT_CHARACTERISTICSi  
+ ?PUBLICATION_YEAR Fixed Effects,t + ?Center Fixed Effects,i) (3) 
 
                                                 
35 Alternative Poisson regression models with robust standard errors produced similar results. 
36 We employ the robust standard errors, using Huber-White sandwich estimator (Allison and Waterman, 2002; 
Greene, 2004) to account for possible heteroscedasticity, and lack of normality in the error terms. 
 
 27
 4.3. Empirical results 
Our first analysis focuses on how a patenting policy resulting in paired patents relates to the 
importance of scientific knowledge and genomic innovation. In all our models, we report the 
coefficients as incidence rate ratios (IRR), which can be derived by exponentiating the 
coefficients, ?k of the independent variable xk of the negative binomial regression models. In our 
case, the IRR can be interpreted as the factor change in annual citations received in a given year 
due to a unit increase in the regressor. For example, an IRR of 2.03 in the coefficient indicates a 
103% increase in the dependent variable for a unit increase in the independent variable, all else 
being equal.  
 
Table 7 shows the impact of paired patent and patenting policy on knowledge accumulation. 
Model 7-1 shows the baseline regression model with controls only. Model 7-2 shows the 
marginal effects regression model with the independent variables paired patent and patenting 
policy included. Model 7-3 shows the full negative binomial regression model (with robust 
standard errors) incorporating publication year fixed effects and center fixed effects. As a 
robustness check, the fixed-effects Poisson regression model (with robust standard errors) shown 
in Model 7-4 produced similar results to Model 7-3.37      
------------------------------ 
Insert Table 7 about here 
--------------------------------- 
 
The coefficients and statistical significance of the independent and control variables remain 
stable and similar across Models 7-1, 7-2 and 7-3.38 In the most stringent model, Model 7-3, 
which includes publication year and center fixed effects, we find that publications with a ?paired 
patent? is significant (at the 1.6% level), strongly and positively associated with the number of 
cumulative forward citations. Specifically, a scientific paper with a paired patent is associated 
                                                 
37 The Poisson model provides a consistent estimate of the conditional mean function, even if the variances are mis-
specified (Wooldridge, 1999). However, when there is over-dispersion (as in this case), the Poisson process may 
result in consistent but inefficient estimates. On the other hand, negative binomial (fixed effects) should yield 
consistent but efficient estimates in the case of well-specified conditional variance. To assure the readers, fixed-
effects Poisson regression model (with robust standard errors) was performed as a robustness check and yielded 
similar results.  
38 An alternative specification of fixed-effects negative binomial models with robust standard errors, clustered by the 
eight genome centers to account for possible correlations in the errors for publications within each center produced 
only slight variation in the magnitude of the standard errors but no change in statistical significance and results 
across all variables.   
 28
 with an increase in cumulative citations by more than a factor of two (factor of 2.03). While we 
cannot be certain that the patent serves as a signal (Hsu and Ziedonis 2007) to enhance the 
cumulative forward citations on a piece of scientific knowledge or innovation over its lifetime, 
this finding suggests that an organizational pro-patenting policy generates patents that are 
associated with the most highly cited and important scientific findings and innovations. 
 
Furthermore, publications from centers with a patenting policy (i.e. Whitehead, Baylor and 
Celera Genomics) accrue significantly (at the 1% level) more cumulative citations by a factor of 
1.63, relative to the other genome centers. This further supports the notion that an institutional 
pro-patenting policy enhances the visibility and influence of its scientific research and 
publications. 
 
In terms of the type of the scientific research, specific human gene sequencing variable is 
significant and negative (by a factor of 0.63), while techniques, methods or tools variable is 
significant and strongly positive (by a factor of 2.28). This suggests that if a publication captures 
research on specific human gene sequencing information, it is not as highly cited or influential as 
those potentially more practical and industry driven scientific applications in techniques, 
methods or tools.  
 
The other control variables largely behaved as expected. The number of authors is significant (at 
the 0.1% level) and positive.  This suggests that the higher the number of authors, the higher the 
cumulative forward citations. While the magnitude of the increase is small (adding another 
author increases the forward citations by just 1%), the relatively small mean number of authors 
(about 15), with the standard deviation more than twice as large (about 31), suggest that a more 
substantial change in the percentage of authors would have a correspondingly larger effect on 
citations. More authors could signal larger scale or more complex research projects that appeal to 
a wider network of scientists and hence may be cited more. Article type is significant and 
strongly positive.  This is expected because publications that are classified as ?articles? or 
?reviews? are the most noticeable forms of knowledge outputs and therefore most highly cited 
among other types of publications. Journal impact factor is significant and positive.  This is 
expected as it measures a journal?s relative importance and ?visibility? and provides a proxy for 
 29
 its quality, especially in comparison with others in the same field.  A high impact journal is also 
one that is more frequently cited. Number of centers collaborating on a particular scientific 
innovation is significant (at the 0.1% level) and positive.  This suggests the higher the number of 
collaborating institutions, the higher the cumulative forward citations.  This is reasonable for 
similar reason as number of authors. Finally, industry collaboration is not significant. This 
suggests that teaming up with industry scientists in genomic research and publication may not 
increase cumulative forward citations to the publications. 
 
4.4. Implications 
Through interviews, quantitative analyses and qualitative evidence, we find that patents 
generated by the genome centers with a patent policy are associated with the most important and 
influential scientific publications (measured by cumulative citations to these publications) at both 
patent- and organizational- levels of observation. These paired patents lead to agreements, 
licensing and start-ups. Focusing on organizational governance in IP and disclosure, if the 
government organizes and funds a variety of scientific projects but allows individual 
organizations to control their own IP decisions (with little or no regulatory oversight), there are 
more incentives for instituting a patenting policy from a commercialization perspective, as in the 
cases of Whitehead/MIT and Celera Genomics.  
 
In other words, while patenting is critical for commercialization to occur in the form of licensing 
and start-ups, a consequence of organizations with a patenting policy is to generate patents that 
are, on the average, associated with the more important pieces of research. This finding is of 
concern to policy and decision makers because if patent grant has an adverse temporal impact to 
long-run supply of public (genomic) knowledge (Huang and Murray, in press), it implies that 
follow-on research and innovation on the more important scientific knowledge are more 
adversely affected than other knowledge. Hence in the long-run, the supply of the more 
important public knowledge may be reduced. This would be detrimental to both public research 
efforts into critical disease areas and private firms that rely on the supply of this public 
knowledge. 
 
 30
 As a result of government experimentation, we are better able to understand variations in 
organizational policy specifically in IP and disclosure. In addition to the diversity of approach 
introduced by the government (which is beneficial to the economy), this natural experiment 
setting has allowed for better policy evaluation. Government has the information and tools to 
intervene in policy settings through targeted restrictions of patenting on important government-
funded projects to maximize rapid and full disclosure of important scientific knowledge. This 
will make important scientific knowledge widely available for firms, organizations and 
individuals who depend on such public knowledge to further innovate. 
 
5. Roadmap for designing and analyzing experimentation  
 
Reinterpreted through the lens of economic experiments, the human genome project becomes a 
setting for a much richer understanding of the ways in which organizational and institutional 
choices shape scientific productivity.  Richly described, these organizational dimensions 
included the presence or absence of intellectual property, co-located versus distributed work, 
freedom to publish or not and the imposition of particular forms of copyright and trade secrets 
over knowledge production.  Through careful analysis of this experiment we have demonstrated 
the power of entrepreneurial experimentation as a way to create diversity in talent, approach and 
organization and as a starting point for more effective program evaluation.  The diversity 
introduced by the government incorporated different characteristics into the organizations 
undertaking the same scientific project (in this case, we focused on organizational disclosure and 
IP choices).  Consequently, different types of knowledge and associated commercially oriented 
outputs were generated at different speed even by the genome centers within the same public 
consortium. Private Celera genomics had demonstrated a shortened timeline and dramatically 
different organizational IP strategy in completing the project alongside the public centers.         
 
In its narrow construction, our study is part of a broader effort to take advantage of such 
experiments to explore the ways in which institutional and organizational arrangements influence 
the productivity of the scientific community (Murray and Stern, 2007; Murray et al., 2009; 
Williams, 2009).  We contribute to an understanding of these issues by showing that an 
organizational pro-patenting policy tends to generate patents associated with the most important 
and influential scientific research. To the extent that such patent grant has an adverse temporal 
 31
 impact on the long-run supply of public (genomic) knowledge (Huang and Murray, in press), 
follow-on research and innovation on the most important scientific knowledge are more 
adversely affected than other knowledge. While patents are key to commercialization as in the 
cases of Whitehead Institute and Celera Genomics, having a policy of no patent and full 
disclosure allows for rapid dissemination of knowledge and encourages downstream research, 
development and innovations.    
 
Our study also demonstrates the potentially powerful role of the government serving as an 
entrepreneur by ensuring a wide range of policy experiments, each of which explores a rich and 
diverse landscape of possible organizational, technical and institutional configurations.  By 
laying the groundwork for such experimentation, the government is facilitating efforts that lie at 
the very core of entrepreneurship ? diversity and experimentation.     
 
In the arena of science policy the government can promote experimentation in the scientific 
community by reducing its riskiness and ensuring that the learning is captured across projects ? 
not only along the technical dimension but also along critical organizational and institutional 
dimensions.  As the example of the HGP suggests, the particular dimension of experimentation 
that is most novel in our discussion of science policy is organizational diversity. Rosenberg 
(1992) notes that critical dimensions include ?size, pattern of ownership, product mix, etc? (p. 
193).  For experiments in R&D we must consider issues of team size, team distribution, and team 
disciplinary diversity as well as institutional rules regarding incentives for freedom and control. 
As Aghion, Dewatripont and Stein (2008) have argued, these are crucial features shaping the 
incentives for scientists to pursue a diverse set of technical paths.  Within the scientific 
community, such experiments may be particularly feasible given the small-scale of typical 
operations, the degree to which individual scientists lead their laboratories in an autonomous 
fashion etc. and the lack of strongly bureaucratic organizations.   
 
The entrepreneurial perspective on the role of science policy in government also allows us to 
reconsider the debate over the rationale for government spending on R&D in areas where private 
funding may potentially be available (suggesting that public funding was not overcoming a 
market failure) ? as was the case with the Human Genome Project.  By reframing the role of 
 32
 government as an opportunity to experiment with alternative organizational and institutional 
arrangements, the focus becomes not on duplicative technical investments but instead on 
investments in alternative (and potentially more productive) organizational and institutional 
choices.   
 
Overall, our argument suggests that the government must create an environment in which 
scientists in the public and private sector, university leaders and corporate leaders have strong 
incentives to experiment with the way in which they attempt to solve the world?s most complex 
questions.  In designing and analyzing economic experimentation, the government can and 
should first proactively identify opportunities to seed a variety of entrepreneurial experiments. 
While the government need not undertake all such experiments directly, it should provide the 
specific framework and compass to guide individual organizational policies toward varying their 
technical and institutional approaches, particularly in their R&D efforts. This should be done in 
addition to provision of any financial resources.  
 
We also suggest that the government transition from being merely an investor in projects to an 
entrepreneur, actively organizing a diversity of economic experiments on a wide variety of 
science and R&D projects (among others).  The results could lead to more and better options in 
terms of production, innovative technologies, and institutional arrangements. Science policy 
could even be designed to purposefully build in competitions or competing groups, employing 
different technical approaches and organizational policies to achieve similar goals.  
   
Finally, government should carefully assess and evaluate the outcomes from each of these 
(intended) experiments. Mechanisms for assessment, data collection and program evaluation 
should be tactfully built in at the start of the project. Continuous evaluation and assessment are 
critical at different stages of the project for the purpose of feedback, gate-keeping and 
interventions when needed. For example, the direction of the project should be altered (or even 
stopped) when certain benchmarks at a predetermined stage or time are not met. To enhance 
efficiency, these mechanisms could be aligned into the incentive structure or organizational 
levers that facilitate the successful completion of the project. The outcome of the evaluations 
 33
 should act as inputs, not only for interventions but for initiation of new entrepreneurial 
experimentations.          
 
Figure 3 outlines the three-stage framework to entrepreneurial experiments that government can 
undertake to foster a diversity of technical, individual, organizational and institutional 
approaches to a particular problem and its solution. 
 
------------------------------- 
Insert Figure 3 about here 
---------------------------------- 
 
If well designed, entrepreneurial experimentation by the government through a variety of 
policies and practices can not only yield much valued diversity but also more effective program 
analysis.  Simply by changing funding mechanisms and by incorporating new goals into existing 
monitoring mechanisms, the government could spur a wide range of economic experiments in 
the scientific community and capture key insights in the process.  This would provide a less 
intrusive means to engage in the science of science management. This agenda holds considerable 
promise for the development of science of science policy grounded in rich evidence and wide-
ranging experimentation. 
  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We thank the MIT Technology Licensing Office for generously providing access to its 
commercialization data. Editor Albert Link and anonymous reviewers gave insightful comments 
and suggestions which benefited earlier drafts of this paper. The first author gratefully 
acknowledges the financial support provided by a Merck-MIT fellowship. All errors remain our 
own.  
 
 
 34
 References  
 
Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P., Bursztyn, L., Hemous, D., 2009. The Environment and Directed 
Technical Change. MIT Working Paper. http://econ-www.mit.edu/files/4383 
 
Acemoglu, D., 2009. A Note on Diversity and Technological Progress. MIT Working Paper. 
http://econ-www.mit.edu/files/4373 
Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., Stein, J.C., 2008. Academic freedom, private-sector focus, and the 
process of innovation. RAND Journal of Economics 39 (3), 617-635. 
Arrow, K., 1962. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. In: The Rate 
and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.   
BBC News, 1999. Human Gene Patents Defended. 27 October. 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/487773.stm 
Bentley, D.R., 1996. Genomic sequence information should be released immediately and freely 
in the public domain. Science 274, 533-534.  
Bush, V., 1945. Science: The endless frontier. United States Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C. 
Business Week, 1990. Cover Story ? The Genetic Age. 28 May, No. 3161, pp. 68, McGraw-Hill. 
 
Business Week, 1992. Cover Story ? This Genetic Map will Lead to a Pot of Gold. 2 March, No. 
3254, Pg 74, McGraw-Hill. 
 
Chicago Sunday Times, 1989. Scientists Calling for U.S. to Spend $3 Billion to Identify Human 
Genes. 8 January. 
 
Collins, F., Galas, D., 1993. A new five-year plan for the U.S. Human Genome Project. Science 
262, 43-46. 
 
Foray, D., 2000. Innovation policy experiment at the regional level.  Workshop on the regional 
level of implementation of innovation and education and training policies, 23-24 November, 
Brussels, Belgium. ftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/improving/docs/ser-foray-paper.pdf  
 
Greenstein, S., 2007. Economic Experiments and Neutrality in Internet Access. Working Paper 
No. 13158, NBER. 
Goldfarb, B., Kirsch, D., Miller, D.A., 2007. Was there too little entry during the dot com era? 
Journal of Financial Economics 86 (1), 100-144.  
Groopman, J., 2001. Annals of Medicine: The Thirty Years? War. The New Yorker. 4 June, pp. 
52.  
 35
 Henderson, R., Cockburn, I., 1994. Measuring competence? Exploring firm effects in 
pharmaceutical research. Strategic Management Journal 15, 63-84. 
Horrobin, D.F., 1986. Glittering prizes for research support, Nature 324, 221-221.   
 
Kalil, T., 2006. Prizes for Technological Innovation. Brookings Institution Working Paper No. 8. 
 
Huang, K.G., Murray, F.E., in press. Does patent strategy shape the long-run supply of public 
knowledge? Evidence from human genetics. Academy of Management Journal. 
 
Huang, K.G., 2009. Knowledge production in innovative firms under uncertain intellectual 
property conditions. In: Solomon, G.T. (Ed.), Academy of Management Best Paper 
Proceedings. 
Hunkapiller, T., Kaiser, R.J., Koop, B.F., Hood, L., 1991. Large-scale and automated DNA 
sequence determination. Science 254 (5028), 59-67. 
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, 2001. Initial sequencing and analysis of 
the human genome. Nature 409, 860-921. 
Jensen, K., Murray, F.E., 2005. Intellectual property landscape of the human genome. Science 
310 (5746), 239-240. 
Jones, B.F., Wuchty, S., Uzzi, B., 2008. Multi-university research teams: shifting impact, 
geography, and stratification in science. Science 322 (5905), 1259-1262. 
 
Kaplan S., Murray F.E., in press. Entrepreneurs, institutions and the construction of value in 
biotechnology. Research in the Sociology of Organizations. 
 
Kolata, G., 2009. Grant System Leads Cancer Researchers to Play It Safe. New York Times, 
June 29. 
 
Lander, E.S., Linton, L.M., Birren, B., Nusbaum, C., Zody, M.C., Baldwin, J., Devon, K., Dewar, 
K., Doyle, M., FitzHugh, W. et al., 2001. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human 
genome. International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. Nature 409, 860?921.   
 
Lander, E.S., Weinberg, R.A., 2000. Genomics: journey to the center of biology. Science 287 
(5459), 1777-1782. 
 
Lane, J., 2009. Science innovation: assessing the impact of science funding. Science 324 (5932), 
1273 ? 1275. 
 
Link, A., Scott J. T., 2001. Public/private partnerships:  stimulating competition in a dynamic 
market. International Journal of Industrial Organization 19(5), 763-794. 
 
 36
 Murray, F., Stern, S., 2007. Do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free flow of 
scientific knowledge? An empirical test of the anti-commons hypothesis. Journal of Economic 
Behavior and Organization 63(4), 648-687. 
 
Murray F., Aghion, P., Dewatrapont, M., Kolev, J., Stern., S. 2009. Of Mice and Academics: The 
Role of Openness in Science. MIT Sloan Working Paper. 
Nelson, R., 1959. The simple economics of basic scientific research. Journal of Political 
Economy 67 (3), 297-306. 
Nelson, R., 1961. Uncertainty, learning, and the economics of parallel research and development 
efforts. Review of Economics and Statistics 43, 351-364.   
 
Reuters Health, 2003. Scientists Complete Human Genome Project. 14 April.  
 
Rosenberg, N., 1992. Economic experiments. Industrial and Corporate Change 1, 181?203 
 
Stephan, P.E., 2008. Science and the university: challenges for future research. CESifo 
Economic Studies 54 (2), 313-324. 
 
Stern, S., 2005. Economic experiments: the role of entrepreneurship in economic prosperity. In: 
Understanding Entrepreneurship: A Research and Policy Report, Ewing Marion Kauffman 
Foundation.  
 
The Scientist, 1999. Hot Papers In Genomics: G. Lennon, C. Auffray, M. Polymeropoulos, M.B. 
Soares, "The I.M.A.G.E. Consortium: An Integrated Molecular Analysis of Genomes and 
Their Expression," Genomics, 33:1512, 1996. (Cited in more than 290 papers since 
publication). 15 February, 13(4), 17. 
  http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/meetings/wccs/hot1_990215.html
 
The Washington Post, 1987. Congress Begins to Consider the Genome Project. 22 December. 
The Washington Post, 1989. The Man behind the Double Helix; Gene-buster James Watson 
Moves on to Biology?s Biggest Challenge ? Mapping Heredity. 12 September.  
The Washington Post, 1990. Cracking the Body?s Code. 5 August.   
The Wall Street Journal, 1990. Scientists Find First Clues on How Gene Could Cause Nerve 
Tumors. 10 August.  
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2009. TIP?s Competition in 2009. March. 
http://www.nist.gov/tip/ 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1990a. 1988 Memorandum Sets Foundation for Interagency 
Cooperation. Human Genome Program Human Genome News, May, 2 (1). 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v2n1/03memo.shtml 
 37
 U.S. Department of Energy, 1990b. 5-year Plan Goes to Capitol Hill. Human Genome Program 
Human Genome News, May, 2 (1).    
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v2n1/04five.shtml
 http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/project/5yrplan/summary.shtml#toc
 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1993. NIH, DOE Guidelines Encourage Sharing of Data, Resources. 
Human Genome Program Human Genome News, January, 4 (5). 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v4n5/04share.shtml
 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1994. Genetic Map Goal Met Ahead of Schedule. Human Genome 
Program Human Genome News, November, 6 (4), 1.   
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/V6N4/MAPGOALS.sh
tml
 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1995a. IMAGE Characterizes cDNA Clones. Human Genome 
Program Human Genome News, March-April, 6 (6).   
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v6n6/3image.shtml
 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1995b. High-Resolution Physical Maps of Chromosomes 16 and 19 
Completed. Human Genome Program Human Genome News, January-February, 6 (5), 2. 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v6n5/2safchrm.shtml
 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1995c. Groups Publish Detailed Chromosome 22 Map. Human 
Genome Program Human Genome News, January-February, 6 (5), 14. 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v6n5/14chrom2.shtml
 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1996a. Detailed Human Physical Map Published by Whitehead-MIT. 
Human Genome Program Human Genome News, January-March, 7 (5). 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v7n5/05detail.shtml
 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1996b. DOE, NCHGR Issue Human Subject Guidelines. Human 
Genome Program Human Genome News, July-September, 8 (1). 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v8n1/08humans.shtml
 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1996c. DOE Merges Genome Center Sequencing Efforts. Human 
Genome Program Human Genome News, October-December, 8 (2). 
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/publicat/hgn/v8n2/01doe.shtml
 
Venter, J.C., Adams, M.D., Myers, E.W., Li, P.W., Mural, R.J., Sutton, G.G., Smith, H.O., 
Yandell, M., Evans, C.A., Holt, R.A. et al., 2001. The sequence of the human genome. 
Science 291 (5507), 1304-1351. 
 
Walsh, J. P., Cho, C., Cohen W. M., 2005. View from the bench: patents and material transfers. 
Science, 309 (5743), 2002-2003. 
 
 38
 Williams, H., 2009. Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the Human 
Genome. Working paper, Department of Economics, Harvard University.  
 
Wooldridge, J. M., 1999. Distribution-free estimation of some nonlinear panel data models. 
Journal of Econometrics. 90 (1), 77-97. 
 39
 Table 1: Key Attributes of the Seven Public Genome Centers 
 
 Official 
Founding 
Year/ 
Leadership 
Affiliation(s) % Human 
Genome 
Sequence 
Completed 
Chromosomes 
Sequenced 
Operating Budget/ 
Funding/ 
Employment 
Whitehead 
Institute/ 
MIT 
Center for 
Genome 
Research 
 
1990 
Eric Lander 
Massachusetts 
Institute of 
Technology 
(MIT) 
~30% 9, 13, 17, 18 and 
Y 
$26 million (NIH 
grant in 1996), $35 
million (NHGRI grant 
in 1999). $45 to $80 
million (annually) 
>250 people 
Wellcome 
Trust 
Sanger 
Institute 
1993 
John Sulston 
Wellcome 
Trust and the 
UK Medical 
Research 
Council 
(MRC) 
 
>30% 1, 6, 9, 10, 13, 
20, 22, X and 
(part of) 11 
$215 million 
(Cumulative as of 
April 2003); 
$430 million (2001-
2006) 
Washington 
University 
Genome 
Sequencing 
Center 
 
1993 
Robert 
Waterson, then 
Richard K. 
Wilson 
Washington 
University 
Medical 
School 
~25% 2, 7, 14, 22 and 
(part of) X. 
Coordinator for 
2, 4, 7 and Y 
$29.7 million grant 
(from NHGRI & 
NIH). $6.7 million 
from 1996 over 3 
years 
 
Baylor 
College of 
Medicine 
Human 
Genome 
Sequencing 
Center 
 
1996 
Richard Gibbs 
Baylor College 
of Medicine 
~10% 3, 12 and (part 
of) X 
$1.3 million from 
1996 over 3 years 
University 
of 
Washington 
Genome 
Center 
 
1996 
Maynard Olson 
University of 
Washington 
~5% (Part of) 1, 3, 7, 
14 and 15  
 
$1 million from 1996 
over 3 years 
Stanford 
Human 
Genome 
Center 
 
1990 
(established in 
UCSF). 1993 
(moved to 
Stanford). 
Richard Myers 
 
Stanford 
University 
>11% (with 
DOE JGI) 
4, 5, 16 and 19 
(with DOE JGI)
$2.5 million from 
1996 over 3 years. 
~ 50 faculty, 
researchers and staff 
DOE Joint 
Genome 
Institute  
1997 
(Combining 
LBNL, LLNL 
& LANL) 
Eddy Rubin 
   
U.S. 
Department of 
Energy (DOE)
>11% (with 
Stanford 
HGC) 
5, 16, and 19 
(with Stanford 
HGC) 
$60 million 
(annually), 
160 employees 
 40
 Table 2: Organizational Choices Governing Disclosure and IP of the Genome Centers 
 
 Public 
 
Private 
Allow Patenting 
 
Whitehead Institute,  
Baylor  
 
Celera Genomics 
No Patenting Sanger Institute (U.K.), 
Washington University, 
University of Washington, 
Stanford, DOE JGI 
 
 
 
 41
 Table 3: Variable Definitions 
  
Name Definition Source 
Dependent Variables 
Cumulative forward 
citation (CFC) 
Number of cumulative citations made by later papers to the (focal) 
paper previously published 
ISI 
Independent Variables 
Paired patent Binary variable (1/0) denoting if a scientific paper is matched to a 
patent pair 
USPTO 
Patenting policy  Binary variable (1/0) denoting if a genome center allows for HGP 
related patents  
USPTO/ Genome 
centers publication 
and websites 
Control Variables 
Number of authors Number of authors appearing on the paper ISI 
Article type  Binary variable (1/0) denoting if the paper is an article/review ISI 
Journal Impact Factor Impact factor (2003) of the journal in which the paper is published  ISI/ Journal 
Citation Report 
Number of centers Number of unique genome centers with addresses appearing on the 
paper 
ISI 
Industry collaboration Binary variable (1/0) denoting at least one private address on the 
paper 
ISI 
Publication year Year in which the paper is published ISI 
Specific human gene 
sequencing 
Binary variable (1/0) denoting if the paper is on specific human 
gene sequence or characterization of genes 
ISI 
Research on human 
or application to 
human 
Binary variable (1/0) denoting if the paper is on  
gene sequences of human vs. other organisms such as mouse, rat, 
zebrafish, worm and bacteria (sequenced as part of the HGP) 
ISI 
Techniques, methods 
or tools 
Binary variable (1/0) denoting if the paper is on sequencing 
techniques, methods or tools including both hardware and software 
ISI 
Whitehead Binary variables (1/0) denoting if the paper is published by 
Whitehead Institute/ MIT Center for Genome Research   
ISI 
Sanger Binary variables (1/0) denoting if the paper is published by 
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute 
ISI 
Washington 
University 
Binary variables (1/0) denoting if the paper is published by 
Washington University Genome Sequencing Center 
ISI 
Baylor Binary variables (1/0) denoting if the paper is published by Baylor 
College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center 
ISI 
University of 
Washington 
Binary variables (1/0) denoting if the paper is published by 
University of Washington Genome Center 
ISI 
Stanford Binary variables (1/0) denoting if the paper is published by 
Stanford Human Genome Center 
ISI 
JGI Binary variables (1/0) denoting if the paper is published by DOE 
Joint Genome Institute 
ISI 
Celera Binary variables (1/0) denoting if the paper is published by Celera 
Genomics 
ISI 
 
 42
 Table 4: Summary Statistics of Variables  
 
Dependent Variables 
Variable n Mean Std. Dev. Min Max 
Cumulative forward citation 1484 84.59 333.57 0 3984 
Independent Variables 
Paired patent 1484 0.01 0.09 0 1 
Patenting policy  1484 0.36 0.48 0 1 
Control Variables 
Number of authors 1484 14.79 31.23 1 274 
Article type  1484 0.75 0.43 0 1 
Journal Impact Factor 1484 10.50 9.52 0 34.8 
Number of centers 1484 5.05 6.65 1 53 
Industry collaboration 1484 0.10 0.30 0 1 
Specific human gene 
sequencing 
1484 0.19 0.40 0 1 
Research on human or 
application to human 
1484 0.74 0.44 0 1 
Techniques, methods or 
tools 
1484 0.12 0.32 0 1 
Publication year 1484 1999 3.08 1990 2003 
Whitehead 1484 0.13 0.34 0 1 
Sanger 1484 0.47 0.50 0 1 
Washington University 1484 0.08 0.27 0 1 
Baylor 1484 0.18 0.38 0 1 
University of Washington 1484 0.04 0.20 0 1 
Stanford 1484 0.02 0.15 0 1 
JGI 1484 0.03 0.18 0 1 
Celera 1484 0.05 0.21 0 1 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43
 Table 5: Correlation Matrix 
 
  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20)
(1) Cumulative 
forward citation 1                    
(2) Paired patent 0.078 1                   
(3) Patenting policy  0.048 0.121 1                  
(4) Number of authors 0.700 -0.012 -0.028 1                 
(5) Article type  0.138 0.034 -0.011 0.143 1                
(6) Journal Impact 
Factor 0.361 0.034 0.045 0.462 0.060 1               
(7) Number of centers 0.625 -0.009 0.052 0.818 0.165 0.410 1              
(8) Industry 
collaboration 0.284 0.046 0.204 0.337 0.040 0.155 0.339 1             
(9) Specific human 
gene sequencing 0.118 -0.006 -0.026 0.173 -0.051 0.030 0.106 -0.036 1            
(10) Research on 
human or application 
to human 
-0.021 0.053 0.185 -0.117 -0.170 -0.065 -0.092 -0.064 0.287 1           
(11) Techniques, 
methods or tools -0.036 0.060 0.000 -0.097 0.079 -0.163 -0.131 0.048 -0.165 0.155 1          
(12) Publication year -0.019 -0.045 -0.301 0.111 0.044 0.024 0.095 0.178 -0.072 -0.149 0.059 1         
(13) Whitehead 0.046 0.119 0.527 -0.005 -0.046 0.105 0.061 -0.043 -0.059 0.057 -0.022 -0.009 1        
(14) Sanger -0.090 -0.085 -0.700 -0.077 -0.054 -0.093 -0.137 -0.208 0.034 -0.123 -0.010 0.215 -0.369 1       
(15) Washington 
University 0.027 -0.026 -0.218 0.127 0.092 0.092 0.075 0.013 -0.037 -0.101 0.063 0.036 -0.115 -0.274 1      
(16) Baylor -0.005 0.018 0.617 -0.065 0.012 -0.058 -0.007 -0.092 0.051 0.172 -0.032 -0.450 -0.181 -0.432 -0.135 1     
(17) University of 
Washington 0.025 -0.019 -0.155 0.016 0.039 0.017 0.036 -0.011 -0.033 0.014 -0.055 -0.001 -0.082 -0.194 -0.061 -0.095 1    
(18) Stanford 0.037 -0.014 -0.114 0.053 -0.028 0.028 0.045 -0.005 0.095 0.060 -0.014 0.016 -0.060 -0.144 -0.045 -0.071 -0.032 1   
(19) JGI 0.025 -0.016 -0.135 0.038 0.023 -0.043 0.054 0.031 -0.011 -0.069 0.005 0.143 -0.071 -0.170 -0.053 -0.083 -0.037 -0.028 1  
(20) Celera 0.042 0.050 0.303 0.059 0.027 0.037 0.031 0.686 -0.056 0.019 0.092 0.140 -0.089 -0.212 -0.066 -0.104 -0.047 -0.035 -0.041 1 
 
 
 44
 Table 6: Whitehead Patents from 1990 to 2003 (Cumulative Forward Citations as of June 2004) 
 
Pat. 
Grant 
Year 
90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
# Patents 
Belong to 
Genome 
Research 
1 0 0 0 1 0 1 2 5 8 4 4 7 7
# HGP 
Related 
Patents 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 4
Mean 
CFC 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 15 5 1 3 0 0
Mean # 
Inventors 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 1 2 3 3 4
 
 
 45
 Table 7: Impact of Paired Patent and Patenting Policy on Cumulative Knowledge Accumulation  
 
Main Results: 
Negative Binomial Regression Model:  
DV = Cumulative Forward Citations 
Coefficients reported as incidence rate ratios, 
IRR  
Robustness Check: 
Poisson Regression 
Model: 
DV = Cumulative 
Forward Citations 
Coefficients reported as 
incidence rate ratios, IRR
  
[7-1]  
Baseline 
Model with 
Controls Only 
[7-2]  
Marginal Effects 
Model with 
Independent 
Variables  
[7-3]  
Full Model with 
Center and 
Publication 
Year Fixed 
Effects 
[7-4]  
Full Model with Center  
and Publication Year  
Fixed Effects 
Independent Variables  
Paired patent   2.86***  
(0.86) 
2.03**  
(0.60) 
2.36***  
(0.75) 
Patenting policy   1.67*** 
(0.22) 
1.63*** 
(0.31) 
1.45**  
(0.25) 
Control Variables 
Number of authors 1.01** 
(0.00) 
1.01*** 
(0.00) 
1.01*** 
(0.00) 
1.01*** 
(0.00) 
Article type  11.4*** 
(2.29) 
11.5*** 
(2.13) 
13.8*** 
(1.90) 
12.2*** 
(1.96) 
Journal impact 
factor 
1.08*** 
(0.01) 
1.08*** 
(0.01) 
1.08*** 
(0.00) 
1.07*** 
(0.01) 
Number of centers 1.04*** 
(0.01) 
1.04*** 
(0.01) 
1.04*** 
(0.01) 
1.01*  
(0.01) 
Industry 
collaboration 
0.84  
(0.12) 
0.68**  
(0.10) 
0.93  
(0.15) 
1.61***  
(0.23) 
Specific human 
gene sequencing 
0.65***  
(0.08) 
0.66***  
(0.08) 
0.63***  
(0.07) 
0.78**  
(0.09) 
Research on 
human or 
application to 
human 
0.96  
(0.17) 
0.89  
(0.14) 
0.95  
(0.09) 
1.31* 
(0.18) 
Techniques, 
methods or tools 
1.98*** 
(0.39) 
2.21*** 
(0.46) 
2.28*** 
(0.41) 
1.95***  
(0.38) 
Center fixed effects     Yes Yes 
 
Publication year 
fixed effects 
  Yes Yes 
 
Regression Statistics 
Log-likelihood -6198 -6168 -6009 -46371 
Wald chi-square (p) 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 
Number of 
observations 
1484 1484 1484 1484 
Robust standard errors (of the IRR) in parentheses. *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01 
  
 46
 Figure 1: Organization of the Human Genome Project: Mapping the Key Stakeholders 
 
 
The Human Genome Project (1990-2003) 
NIH DOE
BER [OHER] 
(Announcement)
NIGMS 
(Funding) 
DHHS  
(Renaming Org,) 
NHGRI (1997) 
[NCHGR] 
Joint Genome 
Institute (JGI) 
LBNL, LLNL, 
LANL (1997) 
Genome Centers 
(U.S.A.): 
Whitehead, Wash 
U., Baylor, U. of 
Wash, Stanford  
Other Genome 
Centers in the 
World:  
Sanger (U.K.), 
CHGC (China) etc. 
HERAC  
(Advisory
 
OTA  
 
)
NAS-NRC 
RTI 
(Genome 
Database
 
)
PUBLIC: 
 
PRIVATE:
Celera 
Genomics 
(1998) 
 47
 Figure 2: Human Genome Project Publications from Whitehead, Sanger, Washington University, 
Baylor, University of Washington, Stanford, Joint Genome Institute and Celera Genomics 
8 Center HGP Publications (1990-2003)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
Year Published
N
um
be
r o
f P
ub
lic
at
io
ns
Baylor (BLR)
Celera (CLR)
Joint Genome
Institute (JGI)
Stanford (SFD)
Sanger (SGR)
Univ of Washington
Seattle (UWS)
Whitehead Institute
(WHD)
Washington Univ St
Louis (WUL)
 
  
Figure 3: A Three-Stage Framework to Entrepreneurial Experimentations by the Government 
 
I. Identification and 
seeding of (scientific 
and technological) 
opportunities  
II. Organization and 
participation in a  
wide variety of 
entrepreneurial 
experimentations 
III. Assessment, 
evaluation  
and feedback 
Government as 
Entrepreneur 
 48

