NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
EXPERIENCE OF AND LESSONS FROM EXCHANGE RATE
REGIMES IN EMERGING ECONOMIES
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Working Paper 10032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10032
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2003
This paper was written for Monetary and Financial Cooperation in East Asia forthcoming, Macmillan Press,
2003, in consultation with the Regional Economic Monitoring Unit of the Asian Development Bank, and
Takatoshi Ito and Yung Chul Park, coordinators of the ADB core study on exchange rate arrangements.  The
author would like to thank Sergio Schmukler for preparing Table 3.  The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
?2003 by Jeffrey A. Frankel.  All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ? notice, is given to the source. 
Experience of and Lessons from Exchange Rate Regimes in Emerging Economies
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 10032
October 2003
JEL No. F3
ABSTRACT
The paper reviews recent trends in thinking on exchange rate regimes. It begins by classifying
countries into regimes, noting the distinction between de facto and de jure regimes, but also noting
the low correlation among proposed ways of classifying the latter. The advantages of fixed exchange
rates versus floating are reviewed, including the recent evidence on the trade-promoting effects of
currency unions. Frameworks for tallying up the pros and cons include the traditional Optimum
Currency Area criteria, as well as some new criteria from the experiences of the 1990s. The Corners
Hypothesis may now be "peaking" as rapidly as it rose, in light of its lack of foundations. Empirical
evidence regarding the economic performance of different regimes depends entirely on the
classification scheme. A listing of possible nominal anchors alongside exchange rates observes that
each candidate has its own vulnerability, leading to the author's proposal to Peg the Export Price
(PEP). The concluding section offers some implications for East Asia.
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138-5801
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
 3
Experience of and Lessons from 
Exchange Rate Regimes in Emerging Economies 
 
Jeffrey A. Frankel 
 
 
 
Emerging market countries in Latin America, East Asia, and Eastern Europe 
entered the 1990s with widely varying fundamentals. To over-generalize, Latin American 
countries before the 1990s traditionally had low national savings rates, profligate fiscal 
and monetary policies, and overvalued currencies, together with a large and growth-
inhibiting role of the government in the economy; however, most took very large steps in 
the right direction in the 1990s. East Asian countries had, already for some time, 
exhibited high national savings rates, greater monetary and fiscal discipline, and 
appropriately valued currencies, together with institutions of financial structure and 
government intervention that, though they differed from textbook market economics, 
appeared to be, if anything, more successful than Western-style capitalism, until the 
1990s. Eastern European countries all entered the 1990s with institutions that had become 
universally discredited, but varied widely in their ability to establish macroeconomic 
stability and to make the transition to capitalist institutions. 
 
Although these countries varied in their fundamentals?and varied further within 
the geographic groupings?all ended the 1990s as victims of severe financial turbulence 
in emerging markets. To name only the most spectacular cases, currency and financial 
crises hit Mexico in 1994; Thailand, Republic of Korea, and Indonesia in 1997; Russia in 
1998; Brazil in 1999; and Turkey and Argentina in 2001. In most of these cases, the crisis 
had severe negative effects on economic growth. The causes of these crises have been 
widely debated, but it is difficult to attribute them solely to profligate monetary and fiscal 
policies because the East Asian countries had a strong record on this score, and Argentina 
had also moved very far to establish macroeconomic discipline in the 1990s.  
 
Among other factors, exchange rate regimes have been implicated in most 
accounts of how these countries got into trouble. 
 
Every one of the crisis victims named above was forced by large outflows to 
abandon an exchange rate target and to move to a regime of greater exchange rate 
flexibility. One school of thought has concluded that it was a mistake to have set explicit 
exchange rate pegs, and that the solution lies in increased exchange rate flexibility in the 
long term as well, perhaps in outright floating of the sort that Brazil and Mexico adopted 
after their crises (e.g., Obstfeld and Rogoff 1995 or Larrain and Velasco 2001).   
 
Others have pointed out that none of the crises of the 1990s occurred in countries 
that had in fact been following explicit policies of tight exchange rate pegs. It is true that 
Thailand had been following a rather close de facto peg to the dollar over the 2 years 
preceding the July 1997 crisis. But?now usually forgotten?Thailand had in the early 
1990s been one of those East Asian countries widely said to assign a large weight to the 
 4
yen in its basket,1 and was in 1997 still on a de jure basket peg. All the others had been 
on intermediate regimes both de facto and de jure. Mexico, Indonesia, Russia, Brazil, and 
Turkey had all been keeping their exchange rates within target zones (bands), often 
combined with a preannounced rate of crawl. The Market Average Rate system of the 
Republic of Korea (Korea) had been classified by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
as managed floating (and the US Treasury semiannual reports to Congress had in the 
early 1990s pronounced that the Korean Government had stopped ?manipulating? the 
value of the won, by which it meant that Korea had supposedly begun to let the private 
market determine the exchange rate)2. These arrangements are neither fixed nor floating, 
but are properly denoted ?intermediate regimes.?  
 
Accordingly, a second school of thought holds that it is precisely the looseness of 
the commitment that gets the intermediate regimes into trouble, and that the prescribed 
policy is a firm institutional commitment such as a currency board or the outright 
abolition of the national currency, in order to buy absolute credibility for the central bank. 
Examples include the currency boards of Hong Kong, China; Argentina (until 2001); and 
some other small economies, particularly in Eastern Europe (Estonia, Lithuania, 
Bulgaria); the dollarizers, old (Panama) as well as new (Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Guatemala); and the 12 members of the European Monetary Union (EMU). Proponents 
urge the virtues of currency boards or dollarization on emerging market countries 
everywhere. 
 
The dominant conventional wisdom to emerge in the late 1990s was a third school 
of thought: the corners hypothesis. This viewpoint is also variously called bipolarity, 
hollowing out, the missing middle, and the hypothesis of the vanishing intermediate 
regime.  It neither insists that countries generally should float nor that countries generally 
should institutionally fix. Rather, it says that countries generally should be (or are) 
moving to one extreme or the other, that the lesson of the recent crises is just the 
nonviability of intermediate regimes such as those followed in the crisis countries of the 
1990s. Part IV of this paper discusses the corners hypothesis in more detail. It argues that 
the hypothesis may start to drop out of favor in the aftermath of the experiences of 
Argentina in 2001 and Brazil in 2002, as rapidly as it gained favor in the aftermath of the 
1997-1998 East Asia crisis. 
 
Although newspaper opinion/editorial pieces often pretend that there is only one 
valid side to an argument, economists are accustomed to thinking of everything as a 
trade-off between competing advantages. It is important not to rush to a judgment over 
the optimal exchange rate regime before listing pros and cons and then trying to add them 
up. The author?s position is that all three categories of exchange rate regime?floating, 
firm fixing, and intermediate regimes?are appropriate for some countries, and that the 
choice of appropriate regime cannot be made independently of knowledge of the 
                                                 
1  Frankel (1995a, b) and Frankel and Wei (1994, 1997) offered statistical evidence against what was then 
the common view regarding links to the yen. More recent estimates of the implicit weights in the currency 
baskets of East Asian countries are offered by Benassy-Quere (1999) and Ohno (1999). 
 
2 Frankel (1993a, b). 
 
 5
circumstances facing the country in question. No single regime is right for all countries, 
and even for a given country, it may be that no single regime is right at all times.3 
 
After part I of this paper enumerates alternative exchange rate regimes, part II 
briefly reviews the advantages of fixed exchange rates, followed by the advantages of 
floating exchange rates. Part III discusses frameworks for tallying up the advantages on 
one side versus the other so that individual countries can make a decision; the traditional 
framework is the theory of optimum currency areas, but new lessons came out of the 
experience of the 1990s. Part IV discusses the rise (and possible fall) of the corners 
hypothesis. Part V reviews some empirical evidence on the performance of alternative 
regimes. Part VI surveys other possible nominal anchors, recognizing that for monetary 
authorities not to target the exchange rate opens the question of whether they should 
instead target something else, like the consumer price index (CPI), money supply, 
nominal gross domestic product (GDP), price of gold, or (a newly proposed contender for 
countries with specialized trade) the price of the export good. Part VII draws some 
implications for East Asia and the possibility of a common peg. 
 
Classifying Countries into Regimes 
 
There are of course many more regimes than two, an entire continuum that can be arrayed 
from most flexible to most rigidly fixed. I distinguish nine, grouped into the three broad 
categories of floating, intermediate, and firmly fixed. The list follows. 
 
A. Floating corner 
1. Free floating 
2. Managed floating 
 
B.       Intermediate regimes 
3. Band 
3a. Bergsten-Williamson target zone (fundamental equilibrium exchange rate) 
3b. Krugman-ERM target zone (fixed nominal central parity) 
4. Crawling peg 
4a. Indexed 
4b. Preannounced crawl (tablita, in Spanish)   
5. Basket peg 
6. Adjustable peg 
 
C.       Firm fix corner 
7. Currency board 
8. Dollarization (or euro-ization) 
9. Monetary union 
 
There are many complications. Each of the intermediate regimes can itself range from 
so flexible as to belong truly in the floating category, to so rigid as to belong truly to the 
fixed corner. The relevant parameter in the case of the target zone is the width of the 
                                                 
3 This position, while hardly momentous or novel, is the point made in Frankel (1999). 
 6
margins. In the case of the crawl, it is the speed of crawl; in the case of the basket, it is 
the number of currencies in the basket and the extent to which the weights are publicly 
announced; and in the case of the adjustable peg, it is the magnitude of the shock 
necessary to trigger the change in the parity (the frequency of the contingency in a 
formally modeled ?escape clause?).  
 
In addition, the target zone and the crawl each have two prominent subclassifications: 
one?deserving to be considered more flexible? in which the parity is adjusted in line 
with ex post inflation; and one in which it is not, in order to retain some of the benefits of 
a nominal anchor. To complicate things still further, the features of regimes 3-6 are not 
mutually exclusive, but rather are regularly mixed and matched. In the language of 
Williamson (1996, 1999, 2001), basket-band-crawl constitutes a single regime, 
abbreviated BBC. Nevertheless, I have chosen to list them as four separate regimes in the 
rough descending order of what seems to me their usual degree of flexibility. 
 
It is worth being specific about the boundary separating categories A and B, and that 
separating categories B and C. The best classification scheme would define any managed 
floats as intermediate regimes (category B) if and only if there is an explicit target around 
which the central bank intervenes. Countries where the central bank intervenes in the 
foreign exchange market occasionally, but without any announced target, must be 
classified as floating; otherwise there will be no actual countries in the latter category. 
Toward the other end of the spectrum, a commitment to a fixed exchange rate should be 
classified in category C, firm fix, rather than category B, if and only if it goes beyond a 
declared policy to an institutional commitment (e.g., a law mandating a currency board 
that requires a parliamentary supermajority to reverse it). 
 
De facto regimes differ from de jure 
 
Placing actual countries into these categories is far more difficult than one who has never 
tried it would guess. One reason is that there is a substantial difference between de jure 
classifications and de facto classifications, between what countries say they do and what 
they actually do.  
 
Most of those listed as floating in fact intervene in the foreign exchange market 
frequently. As Calvo and Reinhart (2000) and Reinhart (2000) correctly observe, 
?Countries that say they allow their exchange rate to float mostly do not.? Only the 
United States (US) floats so purely that intervention is relatively rare. 
 
At the other end of the spectrum, most of those classified as pegged have in fact 
had realignments within the last 10 years. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) report that as of 
1995 only six major economies with open capital markets, in addition to a number of 
very small economies, had maintained a fixed exchange rate for 5 years or longer. Klein 
and Marion (1997) report that the mean duration of pegs among Western hemisphere 
countries is about 10 months. The implication is that conventional pegs should be called 
?adjustable pegs,? and classified as intermediate regimes. 
 
 7
Other methodologies have been suggested to classify countries in terms of the 
regimes that they actually follow, for example, by observing the variability in exchange 
rates and in reserve levels.4 Typically, however, the classification does not feel 
persuasive or definitive. Worryingly, the attempts at de facto classification differ widely, 
not just from the de jure classification, but from each other as well.5 
 
Trends in popularity of  regimes 
 
We begin by considering the regimes currently followed by countries, as reported in the 
classification system of the International Monetary Fund?s (IMF?s) International 
Financial Statistics. This system does not follow countries? self-description as slavishly 
as it once did, but it is useful to keep in mind that it is nevertheless an official or de jure 
classification.  
 
Forty-eight countries have altogether given up an independent currency, by means 
of a firm institutional fix; 12 are the members of European Monetary Union (EMU), and 
36 are developing countries or transition economies. Of those 36 countries, 
 
? 8 are ?dollarized? (Ecuador, El Salvador, Panama, four South Pacific island 
countries, and San Marino where the legal tender is not the dollar but the Italian lira),  
? 20 are in monetary unions (6 in the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union and 14 in 
the CFA franc zone6, and  
? 8 are in currency boards (now 7, with the departure of Argentina). 
 
Of the 36 firm-fixers among developing countries, only Ecuador and El Salvador 
have given up national currencies recently. The others never had independent currencies 
in the first place. (Guatemala is also apparently on the path to dollarization.)   True, five 
sovereign countries in the 1990s adopted currency boards that they still have: Estonia 
(1992); Lithuania (1994); Bulgaria (1997); and Bosnia (1998);7 plus Hong Kong, China 
(1983). If one includes the EMU 12, that adds up to about 20 countries that have chosen 
ultra-fixed exchange rate arrangements in the past decade. Does this constitute evidence 
that the heralded world trend toward a smaller number of currencies has begun?  I will 
argue that it does not. 
 
Ninety-eight members of the IMF are classified in an intermediate regime. Of 
these 98 countries, 29 follow conventional fixed peg arrangements, and 10 follow basket 
                                                 
4 Such as Calvo and Reinhart (2000) or Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2001). 
5 The latest, Reinhart and Rogoff (2002) proposes two new categories, ?freely falling? and dual exchange 
rates. This classification makes a big difference for the set of countries that remains behind in the traditional 
categories.  (We return to the question of de facto classification schemes, and the lack of correlation among 
them, toward the end of the paper.) 
6 CFA = Communaut?  Financi?re de l?Afrique. Even the francophone countries of Africa finally 
devalued against the French franc in 1994, though they have retained their currency union among 
themselves.  
7 Two smaller countries, Brunei Darussalam and Djibouti, have had currency boards since 
independence. In addition to these sovereign countries are some even smaller Caribbean island 
dependencies, Democratic Republic of Timor Leste, and Montenegro, which is said to be 
adopting a currency board too, or even declaring euros legal tender. 
 8
pegs. Both categories include some that claim as their regime managed floating while 
exhibiting de facto pegs, but both categories should also be called ?adjustable pegs.?   
Sixteen follow bands or crawls (including five horizontal bands?four of them 
developing countries and one, Denmark, a remnant of the European Monetary System; 
four crawling pegs; and seven crawling bands). Forty-three are classified by the IMF as 
?managed floating with no preannounced path for the exchange rate,? a category that may 
sound like a float but which typically entails sufficient de facto targeting and intervention 
that it should probably be classified as an intermediate regime. 
 
That leaves 40 countries that the IMF classifies as independently floating. Of 
these, 9 are industrialized countries and 31 are developing, middle-income, or transition 
countries. Thus, excluding industrialized countries, 36 can be counted as in the firm fix 
corner, 98 classified as intermediate regimes, and 31 assigned to the floating corner. 
(Since this compilation, two South American countries in early 2002 adopted some sort 
of float, that cannot yet be characterized: Argentina, which left its currency board, and 
Venezuela, which previously had a crawling band. For purposes of the three-way 
classification, I will treat Argentina as trading places with Guatemala, and Venezuela as 
remaining in the intermediate category.) 
 
There is a clear trend toward increased flexibility over the last 30 years. Some 
claim that a trend from the intermediate regimes toward floating has its counterpart in 
another trend from the intermediate regimes toward firm fixing. This is the claim that the 
middle is hollowing out. It sometimes leads to the claim that there will be fewer 
currencies in the future than in the past. Fischer (2001), for example, reports that between 
1991 and 1999, the fraction of IMF members that followed intermediate regimes dropped 
from 62% (98 countries) to 34% (63 countries). The fraction with hard pegs rose from 
16% (25) to 24% (45), while the fraction floating rose from 23% (36) to 42% (77).    
There is nothing wrong with the Fischer statistics; expressing regime popularity in 
terms of percentages of IMF membership is probably the relevant metric from the 
viewpoint of the management of the organization. But it neglects that the membership of 
the IMF, or of just about any other list of the world?s sovereign nations, has been 
expanding over time. During the same two decades, when roughly two dozen countries 
gave up monetary independence by adopting currency boards, dollarization, or EMU, 
roughly the same number of new countries has been created, mainly by the breakup of the 
Soviet Union. Each of these previously had shared its currency with neighbors. For this 
reason, out of the list of regions that are today?s sovereign countries, roughly the same 
number share the currency of another today as they did 20 years ago.  
 
Thus, only two developing countries that had their own sovereign currencies 10 
or 20 years ago have given them up today (Ecuador and El Salvador), and only one more 
has adopted a currency board (Bulgaria). So much for the famous trend toward the firm 
fix corner! By this criterion, contrary to widespread impression, the facts do not support 
the claim that developing countries are rapidly moving toward the corners and vacating 
the middle. 
 
One might instead assert a sort of Markov stasis, in which independent currencies 
are always being created, disappearing, and switching among regimes, but the overall 
 9
pool remains roughly steady. Masson (2001) statistically rejects the hypothesis that "hard 
fix" and "hard float" are absorbing states, thus concluding empirically that intermediate 
regimes are not in fact vanishing. 
 
 
Advantages of Fixed Exchange Rates Versus Floating  
 
The starting point in an evaluation of fixed versus floating exchange rates should be a 
listing of the advantages of each. We consider here four advantages of fixing: providing a 
nominal anchor to monetary policy, encouraging trade and investment, precluding 
competitive depreciation, and avoiding speculative bubbles. We then consider four 
advantages of floating: giving independence to monetary policy, allowing automatic 
adjustment to trade shocks, retaining seigniorage and lender-of-last-resort capability, and 
avoiding speculative attacks. 
 
Advantages of fixed exchange rates 
 
Of the four advantages of fixed exchange rates, academic economists tend to focus most 
on the nominal anchor for monetary policy. The argument is that there can be an 
inflationary bias when monetary policy is set with full discretion. A central bank that 
wants to fight inflation can commit more credibly by fixing the exchange rate, or even 
giving up its currency altogether. Workers, firm managers, and others who set wages and 
prices then perceive that inflation will be low in the future because the currency peg will 
prevent the central bank from expanding even if it wanted to. When workers and firm 
managers have low expectations of inflation, they set their wages and prices accordingly. 
The result is that the country is able to attain a lower level of inflation for any given level 
of output. The nominal anchor argument, of course, presupposes that one is pegging to a 
hard currency, one that exhibits strong monetary discipline, like the deutsche mark. After 
the breakup of the Soviet Union, most of the 15 newly independent states wisely reached 
the judgment that the Russian rouble did not offer a good nominal anchor. The strength of 
the argument for basing monetary policy on an exchange rate target will also depend on 
what alternative nominal anchors might be available; this topic will be explored in part 
VI. 
 
 Thirty years ago, the argument most often made against floating currencies was 
the second one on the list: higher exchange rate variability would create uncertainty; this 
risk would in turn discourage international trade and investment. Fixing the exchange rate 
in terms of a large neighbor would eliminate exchange rate risk, and so encourage 
international trade and investment. Going one step farther, and actually adopting the 
neighbor's currency as one's own, would eliminate transactions costs as well and thus 
promote trade and investment still more.   
 
 Over most of the last few decades, academic economists have been skeptical of 
this claim, for three reasons. First, in theory, exchange rate uncertainty is merely the 
symptom of variability in economic fundamentals, so that if it is suppressed in the foreign 
exchange market, it will show up somewhere else, e.g., in the variability of the price 
level. Second, logically, anyone adversely affected by exchange rate variability? 
 10
importers, exporters, borrowers, and lenders?can hedge away the risk, using forward 
markets. Third, empirically, it was hard to discern an adverse statistical effect from 
increased exchange rate volatility on trade. But each of these arguments can be rebutted. 
First, most exchange rate volatility in fact appears to be unrelated to macroeconomic 
fundamentals. Second, many developing country currencies have no forward markets; 
and even in those that do, there are costs to hedging (transactions costs plus the exchange 
risk premium). Third, more recent econometric studies, based on large cross sections that 
include many small and developing countries, have found stronger evidence of an effect 
of exchange rate variability on trade (especially on a bilateral basis, where far more data 
are available)8 than did earlier studies. Table 1 reports estimates of the stimulus to trade 
and growth that individual developing countries would eventually experience if they were 
to adopt the dollar or the euro as their currencies. 
 
[Table 1 goes about here] 
 
A third advantage of fixed exchange rates is that they prevent competitive 
depreciation or competitive appreciation. Competitive depreciation can be viewed as an 
inferior Nash noncooperative equilibrium, where each country tries in vain to win a trade 
advantage over its neighbors. In such a model, fixing exchange rates can be an efficient 
institution for achieving the cooperative solution. The architects of the Bretton Woods 
system thought about the problem in terms of the ?beggar thy neighbor? policies of the 
1930s. The example can be updated by one possible interpretation of the notorious 
contagion experienced in the crises of the 1990s. Each time one country in East Asia or 
Latin America devalued, its neighbors were instantly put at a competitive disadvantage, 
serving to transfer the balance of payments pressure to them (e.g., from Mexico to 
Argentina in 1995, from Thailand to the rest of East Asia in 1997, and from Brazil to the 
rest of South America in 1999). Many of them felt that the standard prescription to 
devalue did not work, in an environment where their neighbors and competitors were 
devaluing at the same time. If so, a cooperative agreement not to devalue might seem 
called for. 
 
 The final argument for fixed exchange rates is to preclude speculative bubbles of 
the sort that pushed up the dollar in 1985 or the yen in 1995.  As we already noted,  some 
exchange rate fluctuations appear utterly unrelated to economic fundamentals. This 
observation then allows at least the possibility that, if the exchange rate fluctuations were 
eliminated, there might in fact not be an outburst of fundamental uncertainty somewhere 
else. Rather, the ?bubble term in the differential equation? might simply disappear. 
 
Advantages of floating exchange rates 
 
As there are four advantages to fixed exchange rates, there are also four advantages to 
flexible exchange rates. 
 
The leading advantage of exchange rate flexibility is that it allows the country to 
pursue an independent monetary policy. The argument in favor of monetary 
                                                 
8  Frankel and Wei (1994), Rose (2000), Frankel and Rose (2002), and Parsley and Wei (2001). 
 11
independence, instead of constraining monetary policy by the fixed exchange rate, is the 
classic argument for discretion, instead of rules. When the economy is hit by a 
disturbance, such as a fall in demand for the goods it produces, the government would 
like to be able to respond so that the country does not go into recession. Under fixed 
exchange rates, monetary policy is always diverted, at least to some extent, to dealing 
with the balance of payments. This single instrument can not be used to achieve both 
internal balance and external balance. Under the combination of fixed exchange rates and 
complete integration of financial markets, which for example characterizes EMU, the 
situation is more extreme: monetary policy becomes altogether powerless to affect 
internal balance. Under these conditions, the domestic interest rate is tied to the foreign 
interest rate. An expansion in the money supply has no effect: the new money flows out 
of the country via a balance-of-payments deficit, just as quickly as it is created. In the 
face of an adverse disturbance, the country must simply live with the effects. After a fall 
in demand, the recession may last until wages and prices are bid down, or until some 
other automatic mechanism of adjustment takes hold, which may be a long time. By 
freeing up the currency to float, on the other hand, the country can respond to a recession 
by means of monetary expansion and depreciation of the currency. This stimulates the 
demand for domestic products and returns the economy to desired levels of employment 
and output more rapidly than would be the case under the automatic mechanisms of 
adjustment on which a fixed-rate country must rely. 
 
The unfortunate reality is that few developing countries have been able to make 
effective use of discretionary monetary policy. But even if one gives up on deliberate 
changes in monetary policy, there is a second advantage of floating: that it allows 
automatic adjustment to trade shocks. The currency responds to adverse developments in 
the country?s export markets or other shifts in the terms of trade by depreciating, thus 
achieving the necessary real depreciation even in the presence of sticky prices or wages.  
 
 The third advantage of an independent currency is that the government retains 
two important advantages of an independent central bank: seigniorage and lender-of-last-
resort ability. The central bank?s ability to act as a lender of last resort for the banking 
system depends to a degree on the knowledge that it can create as much money as 
necessary to bail out banks in difficulty. For a while it was claimed that a country that 
moved to the firm-fix corner and allowed foreign banks to operate inside its borders, like 
Argentina, would not need a lender of last resort because the foreign parents of local 
banking subsidiaries would bail them out in time of difficulty. Unfortunately, Argentina?s 
experience in 2001 has now disproved this claim. 
 
Recall that the fourth argument for stabilizing the exchange rate arose from an 
increasingly evident disadvantage of free floating: occasional speculative bubbles 
(possibly rational, possibly not) that eventually burst. However, there is a corresponding 
fourth argument for flexibility that arises from an increasingly evident disadvantage of 
pegging: a tendency toward borrowers? effectively unhedged exposure in foreign 
currency (possibly rational, possibly not9), ending badly in speculative attacks and 
                                                 
9 Some who have recently argued for floating on these grounds imply that it would be beneficial to introduce 
gratuitous volatility into the exchange rate to discourage unhedged borrowing in foreign currency. 
 12
multiple equilibrium. Overvaluation, excessive volatility, and crashes are possible in 
either regime. 
  
 
Frameworks for Tallying up the Advantages  
 
Which factors are likely to dominate, the advantages of fixed exchange rates or the 
advantages of floating? There is not one right answer for all countries. The answer must 
depend, in large part, on the characteristics of the country in question. One example of an 
important criterion is the origin of economic disturbances. If the country is subject to 
many external disturbances, such as fluctuations in foreigners' eagerness to buy domestic 
goods and domestic assets (perhaps arising from business cycle fluctuations among the 
country's neighbors), then it is more likely to want to float its currency. In this way, it can 
insulate itself from the foreign disturbances, to some degree. On the other hand, if the 
country is subject to many internal disturbances, then it is more likely to want to peg its 
currency. 
 
Definition of Optimum Currency Area 
Many of the country characteristics that are most important to the fixed-versus-floating 
question are closely related to the size and openness of the country. This observation 
brings us to the theory of the optimum currency area (OCA).10 
 
Countries that are highly integrated with each other with respect to trade and other 
economic relationships are more likely to constitute an OCA. An OCA is a region for 
which it is optimal to have its own currency and its own monetary policy. This definition, 
though in common use, may be too broad to be of optimum utility. It can be given some 
more content by asserting the generalization that smaller units tend to be more open and 
integrated with their neighbors than larger units. Then an OCA can be defined as a region 
that is neither so small and open that it would be better-off pegging its currency to a 
neighbor, nor so large that it would be better-off splitting into subregions with different 
currencies. Even to the extent that corner solutions are appropriate for given countries, 
the optimal geographic coverage for a common currency is likely to be intermediate in 
size: larger than a city and smaller than the entire planet. 
 
The Traditional OCA Criteria 
 
Why do the OCA criteria depend on integration? The advantages of fixed exchange rates 
increase with the degree of economic integration, while the advantages of flexible 
exchange rates diminish. This is clearest when integration is defined as openness to trade, 
but is also true for other sorts of integration. 
 
Openness. Recall the two big advantages of fixing the exchange rate that we identified 
earlier: (i) to reduce transactions costs and exchange rate risk that can discourage trade 
and investment, and (ii) to provide a credible nominal anchor for monetary policy. If 
traded goods constitute a large proportion of the economy, then exchange rate uncertainty 
                                                 
10   The issues are surveyed by Tavlas (1992), and also reviewed by Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1994). 
 13
is a more serious issue for the country in the aggregate.11 Such an economy may be too 
small and too open to have an independently floating currency.  
 
Labor mobility.  One OCA criterion offered in the original Mundell (1961) article was 
labor mobility, here defined as the ease of labor movement between the country in 
question and its neighbors. If the economy is highly integrated with its neighbors by this 
criterion, then workers may be able to respond to a local recession by moving across the 
border to get jobs, so there is less need for a local monetary expansion or devaluation. 
 
Fiscal cushions. The existence of a federal fiscal system to transfer funds to regions that 
suffer adverse shocks offers another way to help mitigate macroeconomic fluctuations in 
the absence of an independent currency. 
 
Symmetry. To the extent that shocks to the two economies are correlated, monetary 
independence is not needed in any case: the two can share a monetary expansion in 
tandem. 
 
Political willingness to accept neighbors? policies To the extent that domestic residents 
have economic priorities?especially on fighting inflation versus unemployment?that 
are similar to those of their neighbors, there will be less need for a differentiated response 
to common shocks.     
 
Criteria of the 1990s 
 
The introduction of currency board-like arrangements in Hong Kong, China (1983); 
Argentina (1991); Estonia (1992); Lithuania (1994); Bulgaria (1997); Bosnia (1998); and 
two smaller countries constituted a resurgence in their use worldwide. A currency board 
can help to create a credible policy environment by removing from the monetary 
authorities the option of printing money to finance government deficits. Argentina, for 
example, at first benefited from such credibility. Argentina was prompted to adopt a 
currency board (which it called the convertibility plan) because of a dramatic 
hyperinflation in the 1980s and the absence of a credible monetary authority. After 1991, 
Argentina became a model of price stability and achieved laudable growth rates, aside 
from setbacks such as the Mexican peso ?tequila?-induced recession in 1995, from which 
Argentina soon rebounded strongly. By most accounts, the currency board was working 
for Argentina.   
 
And yet Argentina never did fit well the traditional OCA criteria. It is not 
particularly small or open, or subject to high labor mobility or close correlation with the 
US economy. A new set of criteria to supplement or even replace the OCA framework 
were proposed, relevant particularly to the decision to adopt an institutional commitment 
to a fixed rate. Whereas the older framework had to do with trade and cyclical stability, 
the new characteristics had to do with international financial markets and credibility. The 
additional criteria12 follow: 
 
                                                 
11 This is the rationale for the openness criterion originally suggested by McKinnon (1963). 
12 Similar lists are also offered by Williamson (1996) and Larrain and Velasco (2001). 
 14
? a strong (even desperate) need to import monetary stability, due to either a history 
of hyperinflation, an absence of credible public institutions, unusually large 
exposure to nervous international investors, or instability arising from a 
dangerous political environment; 
 
? a desire for further close integration with a particular neighbor or trading partner 
(which has the added advantage of enhancing the political credibility of the 
commitment); 
 
? an economy in which the foreign currency is already widely used;13  
 
? access to an adequate level of reserves; 
 
? rule of law; and 
 
? a strong, well-supervised, and regulated financial system. 
 
Currency board supporters pushed for its wider use in the crises of the 1990s?in 
particular, for Indonesia, Russia, and Ukraine. Proclaiming a currency board does not 
automatically guarantee the credibility of the fixed rate peg. Little credibility is gained 
from putting an exchange rate peg into the law, in a country where laws are not heeded or 
are changed at will. Beyond the rule of law, a currency board is unlikely to be successful 
without the solid fundamentals of adequate reserves, fiscal discipline, and a strong and 
well-supervised financial system. 
 
 
The Rise and fall of the Corners Hypothesis 
 
 
The debate over exchange rate regimes is an old one. And yet, a genuinely new element 
was thrown into the mix in the late 1990s. This is the proposition that countries are?or 
should be?moving to the corner solutions. They are said to be opting either, on the one 
hand, for full flexibility, or, on the other hand, for rigid institutional commitments to 
fixed exchange rates, in the form of currency boards or full monetary union with the 
dollar or euro. It is said that the intermediate exchange rate regimes are no longer 
feasible. The target zones, crawls, basket pegs, and pegs-adjustable-under-an-implicit-
escape-clause are going the way of the dinosaurs. A corollary of this theory is that the 
number of independent currencies in the world is declining, perhaps with a rising fraction 
of the world accounted for by a few large regional blocs built around the dollar, the euro, 
and perhaps the yen or some other currency in Asia. 
 
                                                 
13 In a country that is already partially dollarized, devaluation is of little use. If many wages and prices are 
already tied to the dollar, they will simply rise by the same amount as the exchange rate. If liabilities are 
already denominated in dollars?and, in the case of international liabilities, foreign creditors in emerging 
markets generally insist on this?then devaluation may bankrupt domestic borrowers. Such initial conditions 
are discussed as criteria for dollarization by Calvo (1999) and Hausmann et al. (1999). 
 
 15
 Surely a proposition that has become such conventional wisdom as the vanishing 
intermediate regime has a distinguished intellectual pedigree?  Not really. 
 
 Intellectual origins 
 
What is known about the origins of the hypothesis of the vanishing intermediate regime?   
Is it new?  A sixteenth century proverb says, ?There is nothing new under the sun.?14  A 
precursor for the corners hypothesis is Friedman (1953, p.164): ?In short, the system of 
occasional changes in temporarily rigid exchange rates seems to me the worst of two 
worlds: it provides neither the stability of expectations that a genuinely rigid and stable 
exchange rate could provide in a world of unrestricted trade?nor the continuous 
sensitivity of a flexible exchange rate.? Yet the pure corners hypothesis is more recent 
than that; such intermediate regimes as target zones did not become popular until the 
1980s and 1990s. The earliest known explicit reference to the corners hypothesis is by 
Eichengreen (1994). The context was not emerging markets, but rather the European 
exchange rate mechanism (ERM). In the ERM crisis of 1992-1993, Italy, the United 
Kingdom, and others were forced to devalue or drop out altogether, and the bands had 
been subsequently widened substantially so that France could stay in. This crisis 
suggested to some that the strategy that had been planned previously?a gradual 
transition to the EMU, where the width of the target zone was narrowed in a few steps?
might not be the best way to proceed after all. Crockett (1994) made the same point. 
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) concluded, ?A careful examination of the genesis of 
speculative attacks suggests that even broad-band systems in the current EMS style pose 
difficulties, and that there is little, if any, comfortable middle ground between floating 
rates and the adoption by countries of a common currency.? The lesson that ?the best way 
to cross a chasm is in a single jump? was seemingly borne out subsequently, when the 
leap from wide bands to EMU proved successful in 1998?1999. 
After the East Asia crises of 1997?1998, the hypothesis of the vanishing 
intermediate regime was applied to emerging markets. In the effort to ?reform the 
financial architecture? so as to minimize the frequency and severity of crises in the 
future, the proposition was rapidly adopted by the financial establishment as the new 
conventional wisdom. 
 
For example, Summers (1999a): 
 
?There is no single answer, but in light of recent experience what is perhaps 
becoming increasingly clear?and will probably be increasingly reflected in the 
advice that the international community offers?is that in a world of freely 
flowing capital there is shrinking scope for countries to occupy the middle ground 
of fixed but adjustable pegs. As we go forward from the events of the past 
eighteen months, I expect that countries will be increasingly wary about 
committing themselves to fixed exchange rates, whatever the temptations these 
may offer in the short run, unless they are also prepared to dedicate policy 
                                                 
14 The proverb is based on Ecclesiastes, Ch. 1, v. 9:  ??there is no new thing under the sun.? 
 16
wholeheartedly to their support and establish extra-ordinary domestic safeguards 
to keep them in place.?  
  
Other high-profile examples include Eichengreen (1999, p.104-105), Minton-Beddoes 
(1999), and Council on Foreign Relations (1999, p.87). The G-7 (Group of Seven) 
Finance Ministers agreed that the IMF should not in the future bail out countries that get 
into trouble by following an intermediate regime, though it qualified the scope of the 
generalization a bit, for example, by allowing a possible exception for ?systemically? 
important countries.   
It is not only the international financial establishment that has decided 
intermediate regimes are nonviable. The Meltzer report, commissioned by the US 
Congress to recommend fundamental reform of international financial institutions, 
adopted the proposition as well:  ?The Commission recommends that ?the IMF should 
use its policy consultations to recommend either firmly fixed rates (currency board, 
dollarization) or fluctuating rates? (Meltzer 2000, p.8). 
 
The Economist (1999, p.15-16) was thus probably right when it wrote that ?Most 
academics now believe that only radical solutions will work: either currencies must float 
freely, or they must be tightly tied (through a currency board or, even better, currency 
unions).?  But the proposition remains yet to be demonstrated. 
 
It is true that for the middle-income emerging market countries, all of which have 
been exposed to substantial financial volatility in recent years, the casualties among 
intermediate regimes have been high. Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Indonesia, Russia, 
Brazil, and Turkey were each forced by speculative attack to abandon a sort of basket or 
band. The other countries that abandoned band arrangements in the late 1990s also 
included the Czech Republic (27 May 1997), Ecuador (4 March 1999), Chile (3 
September 1999), and Colombia (26 September 1999).15 While most of these policy 
changes took place under great pressure, Chile was not facing tremendous speculative 
pressure when it made its switch.   Indonesia abandoned the bands before the full crisis 
hit. This move won praise at the time. Even though the country was soon thereafter hit 
with the worst of the Asian crises, commentators today tend to include Indonesia in the 
list of data points that is supposed to demonstrate the superiority of the floating option 
over the band option. 
At the same time, Hong Kong, China, in Asia and Argentina in Latin America, the 
two economies with currency boards, were the ones that got through the 1990s 
successfully, judged by the (very particular) criterion of avoiding being forced into 
increased exchange rate flexibility. As a statement of observed trends, at least, the set of 
emerging market countries in the late 1990s did seem to bear out the claimed movement 
toward the corners. It seems intuitively right that these countries, facing finicky 
international investors and rapidly disappearing foreign exchange reserves, had little 
alternative but to abandon their pegs and baskets and bands and crawls and move to a 
float, unless they were prepared to go to the opposite corner. But this proposition is in 
need of a rationale. 
 
                                                 
15 Goldman Sachs. 
 
 17
Should countries be moving toward the corners?  We saw in part II that a majority 
of developing countries still follow intermediate regimes. Do they have good reasons for 
their choices? Close to the center of the economists? creed is that interior solutions are 
more likely to be optimal?for the interesting questions?compared with corner 
solutions. 
 
Lack of theoretical foundations for the corners hypothesis 
 
What is the analytical rationale for the hypothesis of the disappearing intermediate 
regime (or the ?missing middle?)?  Surprisingly, none currently exists. 
 
At first glance, it appears to be a corollary to the principle of the Impossible 
Trinity.16 That principle says that a country must give up one of three goals: exchange 
rate stability, monetary independence, and financial market integration. It cannot have all 
three simultaneously. If one adds the observation that financial markets are steadily 
becoming more and more integrated internationally, that forces the choice down to giving 
up on exchange rate stability or giving up on monetary independence.   
 
This is not the same thing, however, as saying one cannot give up both complete 
stability and complete independence, that one cannot have half-stability and half-
independence in monetary policy. Economists tend to believe in interior solutions for 
most problems. In the closed-economy context, Rogoff (1985) derived the optimal 
intermediate degree of commitment to a nominal target for monetary policy, balancing 
the advantages of precommitment against the advantages of discretionary response to 
shocks. 
 
There is nothing in existing theory, for example, that prevents a country from 
pursuing an exchange rate target zone of moderate width. The elegant line of target-zone 
theory begun by Krugman (1991), in which speculation helped stabilize the currency, 
always assumed perfect capital mobility. Similarly, there is nothing that prevents the 
government from pursuing a managed float in which half of every fluctuation in demand 
for its currency is accommodated by intervention and half is allowed to be reflected in the 
exchange rate. (To model this, one need only introduce a ?leaning against the wind? 
central bank reaction function into a standard monetary model of exchange rate 
determination.) And there is nothing that prevents a country from pursuing a peg with an 
escape clause contingent on exogenous shocks or, more practically, a peg that is 
abandoned whenever there is a shock large enough to use up half its reserves.   
Another justification that has been offered for the corners hypothesis is that when 
a government establishes any sort of exchange rate target, as did the East Asian countries, 
its banks and firms foolishly underestimate the possibility of a future break in the 
                                                 
16 Summers (1999b, p. 326) is explicit:  ??the core principle of monetary economics is a trilemma: that 
capital mobility, an independent monetary policy, and the maintenance of a fixed exchange rate objective 
are mutually incompatible. I suspect this means that as capital market integration increases, countries will be 
forced increasingly to more pure floating or more purely fixed exchange rate regimes.? 
 
not in 
ref. 
Supply 
bibliog
raphic 
data 
 18
currency value.17 As a result, they incur large unhedged dollar liabilities abroad. When a 
devaluation occurs, their domestic-currency revenues are inadequate for servicing their 
debts, and so they go bankrupt, with devastating consequences for the economy.    
?It follows that in a world of high capital mobility there are only two feasible 
approaches to exchange rate policy. One is not just to peg the exchange rate, but 
to lock it in ? the Argentine strategy?.The vast majority of countries will ? have 
to follow the other alternative of allowing their currencies to fluctuate. If the 
exchange rate moves regularly, banks and firms will have an incentive to hedge 
their foreign exposures?? (Eichengreen 1999, p.105). 
 
There is little doubt that the focus on unhedged foreign-currency debt describes 
accurately how the 1997?1998 devaluations contributed to recessions in East Asia. But 
the argument, as stated, has some weaknesses. First, it appears to depend on irrationality 
on the part of banks and firms. Second, it appears to imply that a country would be better-
off by gratuitously introducing extra noise into the exchange rate, to deter borrowers from 
incurring unhedged dollar liabilities. This seems unlikely to be right. Third is the point 
emphasized by Ricardo Hausmann: foreigners are unwilling to take open positions in the 
currencies of emerging-market countries.18 Thus the admonition to avoid borrowing in 
dollars is to some extent an admonition to avoid borrowing at all. It may well be that this 
is the right road to go down, that exchange rate volatility is a way to put some sand in the 
wheels of the excessive capital movements, and that a lower volume of total debt is a 
good outcome. But if this is the argument, the proponents should be explicit about it. In 
any case, it seems doubtful that this argument could be captured by conventional models. 
Recall that Tobin?s original motivation for proposing to put sand in the wheels of 
international capital movement was to reduce exchange rate volatility! 
 
A third possible justification is that governments that adopt an exchange rate 
target, and sometime later experience a major reversal of capital inflows, tend to wait too 
long  before abandoning the target. As of 1998, we thought we had learned that the one 
thing an emerging-market government can do to minimize the eventual pain from a 
currency crisis is to try to devalue early enough (or else raise interest rates early enough, 
as would happen automatically under a currency board?anything to adjust, rather than 
try to finance an ongoing deficit). Mexico, Thailand, and Korea made the mistake of 
waiting too long until reserves ran very low, so that by the time of the devaluation there 
was no good way out, no combination of interest rates and exchange rate that would 
simultaneously satisfy the financing constraint externally and prevent recession 
domestically. But exiting from an exchange rate target can be difficult politically. The 
lesson is drawn that, to avoid this difficulty, governments should either adopt a rigid 
                                                 
17 The version of this argument in Eichengreen (1999, p.104) overstates the extent to which the East Asians 
had ?a stated commitment to the peg,? as most commentators have done as well. In fact, as already noted, 
few of the East Asian countries had explicit dollar pegs. 
18 He calls this the ?original sin.? The term is not meant to imply that the fault lies in policy failings of the local 
government. An admonition to hedge the dollar exposure is not helpful; someone has to take the other side 
of the futures contract, and this will be difficult in the aggregate if foreigners are unwilling to take the open 
position. 
 19
institutional fixed-rate commitment (as did Ecuador) or, if not prepared to do that, 
abandon the peg early.19 
On this basis, when Brazil in the autumn of 1998 delayed the seemingly inevitable 
jettisoning of the exchange rate target that remained from its real plan, many thought this 
would be a repeat of the earlier mistakes. Instead, when the devaluation finally came in 
January 1999, Brazil?s trade balance improved sharply, the lack of confidence subsided, 
and output and employment subsequently performed far better than in neighboring 
Argentina. Thus, it is more difficult to generalize from recent experience than widely 
believed. Furthermore, if we are to use government reluctance to exit a target 
arrangement as the basis of a model of the nonviability of intermediate regimes, it seems 
that we would again require some sort of irrationality (or political constraints20) on the 
part of policy makers. 
 
Thus, each of the three arguments offered? the impossible trinity, the dangers of 
unhedged dollar liabilities, and the political difficulty of exiting?contains some 
important truth. But none seems able to stand as a theoretical rationale for the superiority 
of the corners solutions over the intermediate regimes. Perhaps the corners hypothesis, 
then, is just a misplaced manifestation of the temptation to believe that the grass is always 
greener somewhere else, in this case, in the corners of the pasture? 
 
Frankel et al. (2000) offer another possible reason to favor the firm fix corner: 
verifiability. Central banks announce intermediate targets such as exchange rates so that 
the public can judge from observed data whether they are following the policy 
announced. The general point of that paper is that simple regimes are more verifiable by 
market participants than complicated ones. Of the various intermediate regimes (managed 
float, peg with escape clause, etc.), that paper focuses on basket pegs with bands. 
Statistically, it takes a surprisingly long span of data to distinguish such a regime from a 
floating exchange rate. We apply the econometrics, first, to the example of Chile and, 
second, by performing Monte Carlo simulations. The amount of data required to verify 
the declared regime may exceed the length of time during which the regime is 
maintained. The amount of information necessary increases with the complexity of the 
regime, including the width of the band and the number of currencies in the basket.   
 
Although Frankel et al. (2000) may have convinced a few people that BBC 
regimes are not as verifiable as previously thought, it has not been accepted as a 
theoretical rationale for the corners hypothesis. The model to support the proposition is 
yet to be designed. 
 
 In the author?s view, the Argentine crisis of 2001 dealt a severe blow to the 
conventional view that a country that was willing to make a firm and sincere institutional 
commitment to a rigidly fixed exchange rate, as under a currency board, could thereby 
                                                 
19 Taipei,China, for example, devalued promptly in the Fall of 1997, and suffered less than the others. Chile 
and Israel are two other countries who are said to have ?exited? successfully from exchange rate targets by 
doing so sufficiently early. But this has not always worked.  When Indonesia in 1997 or Turkey in 2000 built 
in some extra flexibility, it did them little good. 
 
20 Governments may have an incentive to postpone devaluations until after elections. See Stein and Streb 
(1998, 1999). 
 20
import credibility, and achieve convergence in price levels and interest rates. It has 
thereby also dealt a severe blow to the corners hypothesis. The situation is far worse than 
the remarkable fact that a supposedly ironclad fix came undone in a short period of time. 
Argentina?s 1999?2002 recession has been so severe as to fully reverse the very good 
income gains during the heyday of the currency board, 1991?1998. If the average growth 
rates reported in the next section were updated, it seems likely that the entire currency 
board category would be pulled down substantially. 
 
There will be those who will say that the events of 2001 merely prove that 
Argentina did not go far enough, that it should have gone all the way to full dollarization.  
But the example of Ecuador is instructive. Three years after its move to full dollarization, 
inflation still exceeds 20%. True, Ecuador devalued sharply before it decided to dollarize, 
so that much of the increase in the price level could be interpreted as catching up to 
purchasing power parity (PPP). But there are two disturbing points: (i) the process has 
taken 3 years, and inflation is still there; and (ii) apparently the currency is now 
overvalued in real terms. Many economists have lost their ability to be surprised by the 
realities of slow price adjustment, inertial inflation, and failures of PPP. Nevertheless, 
that such imperfections of the goods market can remain so severe in a dollarized 
economy means that the transforming benefits of dollarization (and the realism of a 
forward-looking expectations theory) have been greatly oversold. Furthermore, Ecuador?s 
interest rates have not converged to US interest rates any better than did Argentina?s 
interest rates in the 1990s. 
 
 Perhaps Ecuador is too small a country to serve as the basis of generalization. But 
it is now probably the largest of the developing countries to be in the institutionally fixed 
corner. To say that very small open economies must decide whether or not to give up 
their currencies is true. But the firm-fix zealots certainly had in mind something of 
general applicability, as did even the mainstream proponents of the corners hypothesis. 
That no moderate-size emerging market country has successfully adopted a currency 
board or dollarization must cast doubts on the strength of the alleged trend. 
 
 Meanwhile many developing countries, especially in East Asia, have quietly been 
moving back in the direction of de facto intermediate regimes. Malaysia has an exchange 
rate target (aided, at least initially in 1998, by capital controls). Even the star floaters, 
Mexico and Brazil, have started intervening in the foreign exchange market again. The 
latter country was under severe financial pressure at the time of writing (August 2002); 
the IMF responded with a new program that deliberately increased the central bank?s 
ability to intervene in the foreign exchange market. 
 
Empirical evidence on the performance of regimes 
 
Because there are so many pros and cons to exchange rate regimes, there have been few 
attempts at an overall empirical evaluation of their performance. The estimates reported 
in Table 1 will not serve, for example, because they are designed to capture only one of 
many effects on growth (the stimulus that common currencies give to trade).  They leave 
out the potential advantages of countercyclical stabilization under flexible exchange 
 21
rates, or long-term price stability under fixed exchange rates. Here we review three recent 
attempts to evaluate overall performance that have received a lot of attention.   
 
Ghosh et al. (2000) compared the economic performance of currency boards, other 
pegs, and floating exchange rates, with countries placed into regimes by the IMF?s de jure 
classification system. The upper panel of Table 2 summarizes their finding with respect to 
the growth rate. The currency boards grew the most rapidly, on average, by a considerable 
margin. The average growth rates of the floaters and the regular pegs are fairly close 
together; which is higher depending on whether one looks at growth in total income or in 
income per capita. Long-term growth, of course, depends on many variables besides the 
exchange rate regime, such as size, lagged income, the investment rate, population growth, 
openness, and political stability. The authors control for such determinants in a regression 
and get similar results. Again currency boards perform the best, followed by floaters and 
then by noncurrency board pegs. 
 
[Table 2 about here] 
 
Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2002) go through a similar exercise, but with 
countries classified among regimes based on their de facto classification system explained 
earlier. They are interested in the three-way distinction float, fix, and intermediate, shown in 
the middle panel of Table 2. When they use the IMF?s classification system, the 
intermediate regimes perform the best. But when they use their own de facto system (LYS), 
the ranking precisely reverses. Now the floaters grow the most rapidly. When they run 
regressions to condition growth rates on standard determinants, they get similar answers to 
the unconditional averages: according to the IMF classification, the intermediate regimes do 
the best, while according to the LYS classification, the intermediate regimes do the worse, 
and the floaters do the best. 
 
As already mentioned, Reinhart and Rogoff (2002) suggest breaking out countries 
that have dual or multiple exchange rates, as a separate category. But for the average growth 
rates, it does not seem to make very much difference. Among the remaining categories, the 
ranking of the growth rates is almost the same as if one took the IMF classification without 
breaking out dual rates. Countries with limited flexibility come in first, and floaters come in 
last.  
 Three attempts, three different answers.  The IMF classification says that 
intermediate regimes grow the fastest, the Ghosh et al (2000) classification claims that 
currency boards do, and the LYS classification assigns floaters that honor.  The differences 
appear to have less to do with methodology (what is controlled for) or sample (time period 
or set of countries), than with the classification scheme with which each starts.   Table 3 
shows that the alternative de facto regime classification regimes that have been proposed are 
surprisingly uncorrelated with each other, quite aside from the correlation with de jure 
classification.  This confirms that the distinctions among exchange rate regimes, which seem 
so clear-cut when building theories, turn out to be far messier in reality. 
 
[Table 3 about here]  
 
 22
Other possible nominal anchors 
 
Many central banks would like to convince their citizens to expect no inflation. Without 
high expectations of inflation, workers will ask for lower wages, firms will accept lower 
prices, and investors will demand lower interest rates. As a consequence, the central bank 
can achieve any given level of output and employment with a low rate of money creation 
and inflation. The question is how to convince the public to lower its expectations of 
inflation. The day is past when it is enough for the central bank to proclaim its firm 
intention to pursue a low rate of money creation and inflation. Such announcements are 
not necessarily considered credible. 
 
 Governments can achieve credibility by tying their hands in some way so that in 
the future they cannot follow expansionary policies even if they want to. Otherwise, they 
may be tempted in a particular period (such as an election year) to reap the short-run 
gains from expansion, knowing that the major inflationary costs will not be borne until 
the future. A central bank that would like to constrain itself so that in the future it can 
resist the political pressures and economic temptations of expansion is like Odysseus in 
the Greek myth. As his ship was approaching the rocks from where the seductive sirens 
lured weak-willed sailors to their doom, Odysseus had his sailors tie him to the mast. 
 
How can a central bank make a binding commitment to refrain from excessive 
money creation?  It can tie its hands by a rule, a public commitment to fix a nominal 
magnitude. Possible candidates for nominally anchored monetary regimes include 
monetarism, a gold standard, inflation targeting, nominal income targeting, and exchange 
rate pegs. In each case, the central bank is deliberately constrained by a rule setting 
monetary policy so as to fix a particular magnitude?the price of gold, the money supply, 
the inflation rate, nominal income, or the exchange rate. Monetary policy is automatically 
tightened if the magnitude in question is in danger of rising above the pre-set target, and 
is automatically loosened if the magnitude is in danger of falling below the target. The 
goal of such nominal anchors is to guarantee price stability. 
 
 Preventing excessive money growth and inflation is the principal ?pro? argument 
for fixing the price of gold or some other nominal anchor. What, then, are the ?con? 
arguments? The overall argument against the rigid anchor is that a strict rule prevents 
monetary policy from changing in response to the needs of the economy. The general 
problem of mismatch between the constraints of the anchor and the needs of the economy 
can take three forms: (i) loss of monetary independence, (ii) loss of automatic adjustment 
to export shocks, and (iii) extraneous volatility. First, under a free-floating currency, a 
country has monetary independence. In a recession, when unemployment is temporarily 
high and real growth temporarily low, the central bank can respond by increasing money 
growth, lowering interest rates, depreciating the currency, and raising asset prices, all of 
which to mitigate the downturn. Under a pegged currency, however, the central bank 
loses that sort of freedom. It must let recessions run their course. The second point is that 
even if the central bank lacks the reflexes to pursue a timely discretionary monetary 
policy, under a floating exchange rate, a deterioration in the international market for a 
country?s exports should lead to an automatic fall in the value of its currency. The 
resulting stimulus to production will mitigate the downturn even without any deliberate 
 23
action by the government. Again, this mechanism is normally lost under a rigid nominal 
anchor.   
 
A third consideration makes the problem still more difficult. If a country has 
rigidly linked its monetary policy to some nominal anchor, exogenous fluctuations in that 
anchor will create gratuitous fluctuations in the country?s monetary conditions that may 
not be positively correlated with the needs of that particular economy.   
 
Each of the various magnitudes that are candidates for nominal anchor has its own 
characteristic sort of extraneous fluctuations that can wreck havoc on a country?s 
monetary system.   
 
? Fixed exchange rate. Under a fixed exchange rate, fluctuations in the value of 
the particular currency to which the home country is pegged can produce 
needless volatility in the country?s international price competitiveness. For 
example, the appreciation of the dollar from 1995 and 2001 was also an 
appreciation for whatever currencies were linked to the dollar. Regardless of 
the extent to which one considers the late-1990s dollar appreciation to have 
been based in the fundamentals of the US economy, there was no necessary 
connection to the fundamentals of smaller dollar-linked economies. The 
problem was particularly severe for some far-flung economies that had 
adopted currency boards over the preceding decade: Hong Kong, China; 
Argentina; and Lithuania. 
 
? Monetarism. Under a rule that fixes the rate of growth of the money supply, 
fluctuations in the public?s demand for money or in the behavior of the 
banking system can directly produce gratuitous fluctuations in the interest rate 
and thereby in the real economy. Such velocity shocks may be particularly 
large in developing countries undergoing financial liberalization.21 
 
? Inflation targeting. The current fashion is targeting the price level or inflation 
rate. Inflation targeting was adopted in the early 1990s by such countries as 
Australia, Canada, Finland, New Zealand, Spain, Sweden, and United 
Kingdom .22  After 1997, some important emerging market countries followed 
suit: Brazil, Chile, Czech Republic, Israel, Poland, and South Africa. East 
Asian countries that have moved in this direction include Indonesia, Korea, 
and Philippines.23 Relative to M1 targeting, a key advantage of inflation 
targeting is the offsetting of velocity shocks. But, as the proponents recognize, 
the inflation target may have to be abandoned in the face of large supply 
shocks, such as oil price increases facing an oil-importing country. The 
                                                 
21  E.g., Dekle and Pradhan (1997). 
 
22 Among many possible references on inflation targeting generally are Svensson (1995), Bernanke et al  
(1999), and Loayza and Soto (2002).  
23 Proponents of the arrangement for developing countries include Mishkin (2000) and Debelle (2001). But 
Masson et al. (1997) argue that developing countries may not be well-suited to inflation targeting. 
 24
alternative of continuing to set monetary policy so as to prevent a surge in the 
price level would imply a needlessly severe recession. 
 
? Nominal income targeting. The need for robustness with respect to velocity 
shocks and import price shocks, respectively, is used to argue the superiority 
of nominal income targeting over money targeting and inflation targeting.24  
But nominal income targeting, even as a proposal, has received less attention 
in recent years and most proponents have industrialized countries in mind 
rather than developing countries. On one hand, McKibbin and Singh (2000) 
argue that nominal income targeting is particularly appropriate for developing 
countries because they face large supply shocks. On the other hand, a practical 
argument against nominal income targeting that has been important for 
developing countries, at least in the past, is that the GDP data have often been 
available only with a delay of 1 or 2 years.   
 
? Gold standard. If a country pegs the price of gold, the economy is hostage to 
the vagaries of the world gold market. For example, when much of the world 
was on the gold standard in the 19th century, global monetary conditions 
depended on the output of the world?s gold mines. The system did not in fact 
guarantee price stability.25 
 
? Commodity basket. One proposal is that monetary policy should target a 
diversified basket of basic mineral and agricultural commodities. The idea is 
that a broad-based commodity standard of this sort would not be subject to the 
vicissitudes of a single commodity such as gold.26   If the basket reflected the 
commodities produced and exported by the country in question, the proposal 
could work. But for a country that is a net importer of oil, wheat, and other 
mineral and agricultural commodities, such a peg gives precisely the wrong 
answer in a year when the prices of these commodities go up. Just when the 
domestic currency should be depreciating to accommodate an adverse 
movement in the terms of trade, it appreciates instead. In other words, a 
regime of pegging to a basket of commodities would be vulnerable to terms of 
trade shocks. Brazil should not peg to oil, Kuwait should not peg to wheat, 
and Korea should not peg to either. 
 
? Export commodity standard.  Frankel (2002) puts forward the idea of pegging 
the currency to the price of the export good.27 This proposal may sound 
                                                 
24 E.g., Frankel (1995a) demonstrates the point mathematically and gives many other references on nominal 
income targeting. Frankel (1995b) applies to emerging market countries. 
25 Cooper (1985). Proponents reply that the sort of price stability that is most important for efficient long-term 
economic planning by individuals is not simply minimizing short-run variability, but rather the guarantee 
against large inflationary episodes that a gold standard is designed to offer.  
26 A ?commodity standard? was proposed in the 1930s?by B. Graham (1937)?and subsequently discussed 
by F. Graham (1941), Keynes (1938), and others. It was revived in the 1980s as a less narrow version of 
proposals to return to a gold standard. 
 
 
27 Also Schleisser (2001) and Frankel and Saiki (2002). 
 25
similar to inflation targeting. But inflation-targeters target the consumer price 
index (CPI). The main difference between the CPI and the export price is the 
terms of trade. When there is an adverse movement in the terms of trade, one 
would like the currency to depreciate, yet price level targeting can have the 
opposite effect. For example, positive oil shocks as in 1973, 1979, or 2000 
would have required monetary tightening in an oil-importing country if the 
central bank had been constrained to hit an inflation target. The result can be 
sharp falls in national output. Thus under rigid inflation targeting, supply or 
terms-of-trade shocks can produce unnecessary and excessive fluctuations in 
the level of economic activity. But targeting the price of domestically 
produced goods is a possible solution.  It would have the advantage of 
robustness with respect to import price shocks that a CPI target lacks, without 
the data problems of nominal income targeting. Papua New Guinea could peg 
to gold, Indonesia to oil, Chile to copper, Colombia to coffee, Argentina to 
wheat, and Korea to semiconductors. If these countries had been pegged to 
these commodities in the late 1990s?a time of weak export markets and 
curtailed availability of international finance?their currencies would have 
automatically depreciated and stimulated exports, at precisely the time when a 
boost to the balance of payments was needed. 
 
To recap, each of the most popular variables that have been proposed as 
candidates for nominal anchors is subject to fluctuations that will add an element of 
unnecessary monetary volatility to a country that has pegged its money to that variable: 
velocity shocks in the case of M1, supply shocks in the case of inflation targeting, 
fluctuations in world gold markets in the case of the gold standard, terms of trade shocks 
in a commodity basket standard, and fluctuations in the anchor currency in the case of 
exchange rate pegs.   A novel candidate for nominal anchor, the export price, bears 
consideration. 
 
Implications for East Asia 
 
Many Asian countries are reluctant to float freely. They crave a return to some measure 
of exchange rate stability. They range in the extent of their desire for stability, or in 
willingness to constrain their policies in order to achieve such stability. But even those 
who wish to peg?or maintain their peg, like Hong Kong, China?have a problem. To 
whom should they peg? The appreciation of the dollar against the yen and euro from 
1995 to 2001 hurt countries pegged to the dollar, and is considered by some as a major 
cause of the crises of the late 1990s.  
 
For Eastern European countries wishing to stabilize their exchange rate, the euro 
is the natural anchor currency. For most Latin American countries wishing to stabilize 
their exchange rate, the dollar is the natural anchor currency. This is less true for 
Argentina and Chile, who?in part due to geography?have a more diversified pattern of 
trade. For Asian countries wishing to stabilize their exchange rates, the choice of 
currency is much less clear. That so many countries in Asia got into trouble by linking to 
the dollar is no coincidence. (More precisely, the bad luck of an appreciating dollar in the 
second half of the 1990s, especially vis-a-vis the yen, explains the timing of the pressure 
 26
on Asian countries. But the fact that the dollar had occupied a larger role in their 
monetary arrangements than the US played in their economies made an eventual 
mismatch inevitable. In this respect East Asia resembles Argentina and Lithuania.)  But 
neither Japan nor the People?s Republic of China constitutes a large enough share of East 
Asian trade to qualify as the obvious anchor either. East Asian countries have patterns of 
trade and investment that are too diversified to peg to any one major currency. 
 
 A basket peg is the obvious solution.28 In theory, a country ought to be able to 
capture the advantages of a fixed exchange rate with a basket peg, or at least the nominal 
anchor advantage. In practice, this seems not to be the case. First, basket pegs tend to be 
less firm and less credible than pegs to single currencies. Second, if such recent 
econometric studies as Rose (2000) are right, the big trade-promoting gain of fixed 
exchange rates arises when countries adopt a common currency, not just when the 
variability of the effective exchange rate is reduced. Third, as Ogawa and Ito (2000) and 
Ito (2001) point out, it is harder for one East Asian country to peg to a trade-weighted 
basket on its own if its neighbors continue to put a large weight on the dollar. In their 
model, a coordinated move by all East Asian countries to a common basket peg is better 
than a noncooperative equilibrium where each chooses the weights in its basket alone. 
 
    The idea of a common basket peg in East Asia has received a lot of attention. One 
could classify as favorably disposed, not just Ogawa and Ito (2000), but also Williamson 
(1999, 2001), Dornbusch and Park (1999), Kwan (1998, 2001), and several Japanese 
government officials. Others are skeptical.29 
 
If Asian countries were eventually to peg their currencies to the same unit, they 
would reap the advantages of a common currency area, regardless of whether the anchor 
is a basket, a major currency like the yen, or some wholly new unit (such as a composite 
of the member currencies, the route that Europe took with the European Monetary 
System and the ecu, on its way to EMU and the euro). Some observers consider these 
advantages substantial.30  Others wonder if Asia satisfies the criteria for an optimum 
currency area.31 
 
 In any case, a rapid shift in which a substantial number of Asians peg tightly to a 
common currency unit in the near future is unlikely. It took Europe many decades to get 
to a common currency, notwithstanding that in the end, the euro 11 made the leap directly 
to EMU in January 1999 from a system of moderately wide bands. It is difficult to 
imagine the transition having been successful without the run-up that lasted several 
decades?including the ?Snake? of the 1970s and the European Monetary System of the 
1980s. These efforts helped change the optimum currency area parameters over time, to 
shift the logic in favor of currency union. So did parallel initiatives like the Schengen 
agreement on the movement of persons and the sequence of progressively more serious 
regional trading arrangements that culminated in the Single Market of 1992. By 1999, the 
                                                 
28 E.g, Ito et al. (1998) and Ogawa and Sun (2002). 
29 DeBrouwer (2000). 
30 E.g., Goto and Hamada (1994), 376-83. 
31 Eichengreen and Bayoumi (1999), Frankel and Wei (1994, 1995) and Park and Park (1990). 
 
 27
degrees of trade integration, labor mobility, correlation of shocks, and political solidarity 
were much higher than they had been 50 years earlier. Furthermore, throughout the 
postwar period, a strong political motivation drove European economic integration: the 
shared desire to ensure that there be no repeat of the three wars that Germany and France 
had fought over the preceding century. Even so, the path to EMU included innumerable 
crises, devaluations, revaluations, reforms, opting outs, opting back-ins, multispeeds, etc. 
 
 The more important question for Asia is whether some common loose 
arrangement could work for the medium term.  Realistically, such an arrangement would 
have to allow the possibility?depending on circumstances?of individual countries 
opting in or opting out, of choosing their own individual degrees of rigidity on the 
spectrum between tight peg and loose target zone, and of possible individual balance-of-
payments crises along the way. It is neither possible nor desirable to specify one 
exchange rate regime to hold sway across Asia. The most that can be contemplated, in the 
medium run, is a sort of monetary framework for the region. The design of such an 
arrangement is of interest regardless of whether or not one views it as a possible 
transition to tighter monetary integration a la EMU. 
 
 What should be the anchor unit? That no Asian country has pegged to the yen, 
even loosely, must reflect, in part, sensible fears that such a country would be exposed to 
the large fluctuations in the value of the yen against other major currencies. The same 
goes for the idea of pegging to the Chinese renminbi. But a synthetic basket unit is also 
unlikely to do the job, at least at the beginning. Among the requirements for a currency to 
become used internationally is the condition that there is some nucleus country where the 
currency is on ?home turf,? i.e., where it is used for domestic transactions. To try to get a 
purely synthetic currency unit adopted internationally, no matter how well designed, is 
like trying to get Esperanto used as an international language. The IMF has learned this in 
its failed efforts to get the special drawing rights (SDR) adopted as an international 
currency anchor.32 
  Some country has to go first. Let us say it is Singapore. It could announce a 
commitment to a diversified basket peg, with explicit weights (on the dollar, yen, euro, 
and perhaps the renminbi). Countries in the region that wish to stabilize their exchange 
rates in terms of a basket could then choose the Singapore currency as that unit, rather 
than an individually concocted basket. Whether to peg or adopt an intermediate regime 
such as a target zone would be their choice to make. Their incentive to choose the 
Singapore currency as the anchor currency rather than the dollar or yen is that the 
weighted basket would prevent fluctuations in the dollar or yen from causing unwanted 
fluctuations in local effective exchange rates. As more countries joined, they would also 
reap the benefits of facilitated trade among each other. ASEAN members would probably 
be more tempted than others.33   Singapore?s incentive to maintain the basket peg at the 
core, even if at times domestic economic considerations pointed to an effective 
appreciation or depreciation, would include the reaping of seigniorage.  Singapore would 
in a sense serve as the region?s bank. 
                                                 
32 E.g., Mussa et al. (1996). 
 
33 ASEAN falls somewhat short of Europe in the economic criteria for an optimum currency area, and more 
than a little in the necessary political commitment. (Bayoumi et al. [2000]). 
 28
 A moderate gradual approach to East Asian monetary integration along these lines 
might not in the end work. But it would be more likely to work than an ambitious attempt 
to leap directly to a full-fledged regional currency union. Moderate solutions and gradual 
paths still generally work best. 
 
 29
References 
 
Bayoumi, Tamim, and Barry Eichengreen. 1994. One Money or Many? Analyzing the 
Prospects for Monetary Unification in Various Parts of the World. Studies in 
International Finance 76. Princeton University Press. 
 
Bayoumi, Tamim, Barry Eichengreen, and Paolo Mauro. 2000. On Regional 
Arrangements for ASEAN, CEPR Discussion Paper 2411, April. 
 
Benassy-Quere, Agnes. 1999. Exchange Rate Regimes and Policies: An Empirical 
Analysis. In Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Asian Countries. edited by Stefan 
Collignon, Jean Pisani-Ferry, and Yung Chul Park. 40-64. (London: Routledge). 
 
Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin, and Adam Posen, Inflation 
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton University Press: 
Princeton NJ, 1999. 
 
Calvo, Guillermo. 1999.?On Dollarization, University of Maryland, April, available via 
internet http://www.bsos.umd.edu/econ/ciecpn5.pdf, . 
 
Calvo, Guillermo, and Carmen Reinhart. 2000. When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden 
Stop: Consequences and Policy Options. In Key Issues in Reform of the International 
Monetary System, 2001 edited by Peter Kenen and Alexander Swoboda. Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund. 
 
???2000. Fear of Floating. NBER Working Paper No. 7993, November.  Revised 
version available via Internet: http://www.puaf.umd.edu/papers/reinhart.htm 
 
Cooper, Richard. 1985. The Gold Standard: Historical Facts and Future Prospects. 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1-45. 
 
Council on Foreign Relations. 1999. Safeguarding Prosperity in a Global Financial 
System: The Future International Financial Architecture. Washington, DC: Institute for 
International Economics. 
 
Crockett, Andrew. 1994. Monetary Policy Implications of Increased Capital Flows. In 
Changing Capital Markets: Implications for Monetary Policy, symposium sponsored by 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, August 1993. 
 
Debelle, Guy. 2001. The Case for Inflation Targeting in East Asian Countries. In Future 
Directions for Monetary Policies in East Asia, edited by David Gruen and John Simon 
Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia. 
 
DeBrouwer, Gordon. 2000. Does a Formal Common-Basket Peg in East Asia Make 
Economic Sense. Asian-Japan Research Centre, Australian National University. 
 
 30
Dekle, R. and M. Pradhan. 1997. Financial Liberalization and Money Demand in 
ASEAN Countries: Implications for Monetary Policy. IMF Working Paper 97/36. 
 
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Yung Chul Park. 1999. Flexibility or Nominal Anchors? In 
Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Asian Countries, edited by Stefan Collignon, Jean 
Pisani-Ferry, and Yung Chul Park. London: Routledge 
 
The Economist. 1999. Global Finance: Time for a Redesign? January 30:1-18. 
 
Eichengreen, Barry. 1994. International Monetary Arrangements for the 21st Century, 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.  
 
???. 1999. Toward a New Financial Architecture: A Practical Post-Asia Agenda, 
Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics. 
 
Eichengreen, Barry, and Tamim Bayoumi. 1999. Is Asia an Optimum Currency Area? 
Can it Become One?  In Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Asian Countries, edited by 
Stefan Collignon, Jean Pisani-Ferry, and Yung Chul Park. 347-366. London: Routledge. 
 
Fischer, Stanley. 2001 . Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct? Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 15(2): 3-24. 
 
Frankel, Jeffrey. 1993a. Foreign Exchange Policy, Monetary Policy and Capital Market 
Liberalization in Korea. In Korean-US Financial Issues, US-Joint Korea-US Academic 
Symposium, Chwee Huay Ow-Taylor, Washington, DC: Korea Economic Institute of 
America, 91-107. 
 
???. 1993b. Liberalization of Korea's Foreign Exchange Markets, and the Role of 
Trade Relations with the United States. In Shaping a New Economic Relationship: The 
Republic of Korea and the United States, edited by Jongryn Mo and Ramon Myers, 
Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 120-142. 
 
______.  1995a. The Stabilizing Properties of a Nominal GNP Rule, Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking 27, no. 2, May, 318-334.   
 
???. 1995b. Monetary Regime Choices for a Semi-Open Country. conference 
organized by Yung Chul Park. In Capital Controls, Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy 
in the World Economy, edited by Sebastian Edwards. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 35-69. 
 
???. 1999. No Single Exchange Rate Regime is Right for All Countries or at All 
Times. Graham Lecture, Essays in International Finance, Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 215. 
 
???. 2002. Should Gold-Exporters Peg Their Currencies to Gold? A study for the 
World Gold Council, London, June. 
 
 31
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose. 2002. An Estimate of the Effect of Common 
Currencies on Trade and Income. Quarterly Journal of Economics (May) 437-66. 
 
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Ayako Saiki. 2002. A Proposal to Anchor Monetary Policy by the 
Price of the Export Commodity. Journal of Economic Integration (September) 417-448. 
 
Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler and Luis Serv?n. 2000. Verifiability and the 
Vanishing Intermediate Exchange Rate Regime. Brookings Trade Forum 2000, edited by 
Susan Collins and Dani Rodrik. Washington DC: Brookings Institution. 
 
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei. 1994. Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc? Exchange Rate 
Policies of the East Asian Economies. In Macroeconomic Linkages: Savings, Exchange 
Rates, and Capital Flows, NBER - East Asia Seminar on Economics, Volume 3, edited by 
Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger. University of Chicago Press. 
 
???. 1995b. Is a Yen Bloc Emerging? In Economic Cooperation and Challenges in 
the Pacific, edited by Robert Rich, Washington, DC: Korea Economic Institute of 
America. 
 
???. 1997. ASEAN in a Regional Perspective. In Macroeconomic Issues facing 
ASEAN countries, edited by John Hicklin, David Robinson, and Anoop Singh 
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
 
Friedman, Milton. 1953. The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates. In M.Friedman, Essays in 
Positive Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 157-203. 
 
Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, and Holger Wolf. 2000. Currency Boards: The Ultimate 
Fix?  International Monetary Fund.  Revised as ?Currency Boards: More than a Quick Fix?? 
Economic Policy, 31 (October):270-335. 
 
Goto, Junichi, and Koichi Hamada. 1994. Economic Preconditions for Asian Regional 
Integration. In Macroeconomic Linkages: Savings, Exchange Rates, and Capital Flows, 
NBER - East Asia Seminar on Economics, Volume 3, edited by Takatoshi Ito and Anne 
Krueger, 359-388.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
 
Graham, Benjamin 1937. Storage and Stability. New York: McGraw Hill. 
 
Graham, Frank. 1941. Transition to a Commodity Reserve Currency. American Economic 
Review 31(3):520-525. 
 
Hausmann, Ricardo, Ugo Panizza, and Ernesto Stein. 2000. Why Do Countries Float the 
Way They Float? Inter-American Development Bank. (mimeo). 
 
Hausmann, Ricardo, Michael Gavin, Carmen Pages-Serra, and Ernesto Stein. 1999. Why 
Do Countries Float the Way They Do? In New Initiatives to Tackle International 
Financial Turmoil. Interamerican Development Bank Annual Meetings of the Board of 
Governors, Paris. 
 32
  
Ito, Takatoshi. 2001. Discussion of the Case for a Basket, Band and Crawl (BBC) 
Regime for East Asia. In Future Directions for Monetary Policies in East Asia, edited by 
David Gruen and John Simon. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia. 
 
Ito, Takatoshi, Eiji Ogawa, and Yuri Sasaki. 1998. How Did the Dollar Peg Fail in Asia? 
Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 12:256-304. 
 
Keynes, John Maynard. 1938. The Policy of Government Storage of Foodstuffs and Raw 
Materials. Economic Journal (Sept.), 449-460. 
 
Klein, Michael, and Nancy Marion. 1997. Explaining the Duration of Exchange-Rate 
Pegs. Journal of Development Economics 54(2):387-404. 
 
Krugman, Paul. 1991. Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, 106:669-682. 
 
Kwan, C.H. 1998. The Yen, the Yuan, and the Asian Currency Crisis: Changing Fortune 
Between Japan and China. http://aparc.stanford.edu/docs/kwan.pdf. 
 
???. 2001. Yen Bloc. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 
 
Larrain, Felipe, and Andres Velasco. 2001. Exchange Rate Policy in Emerging Markets: 
The Case for Floating. Studies in International Economics no. 224, Princeton NJ: 
Princeton University Press.  
 
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger. 2001. To Float or to Trail: Evidence 
on the Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes. NBER Summer Institute, Universidad 
Torcuato de Tella. 
 
Loayza, Norman, and Raimundo Soto. 2002. Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, 
Challenges. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile. 
 
Masson, Paul. 2001. Exchange Rate Regime Transitions. Journal of Development 
Economics, 64:571-586. 
 
Masson, Paul, Miguel Savastavano, and Sunil Sharma. 1997. The Scope for Inflation 
Targeting in Developing Countries. IMF Working Paper 97/130, October.  
 
McKibbin, Warwick, and Kanhaiya Singh. 2000. Issues in the Choice of a Monetary 
Regime for India. Presented at International Conference on Second Generation Reforms 
for India, Madras School of Economics, Chennai, India, December, 1999. 
 
McKinnon, Ronald. 1963. Optimum Currency Areas. American Economic Review, 53:17-
724.  
 
 33
???. 2000. After the Crisis, The East Asian Dollar Standard Resurrected: An 
Interpretation of High-Frequency Exchange Rate Pegging. In Rethinking the East Asian 
Miracle, edited by Joseph Stiglitz and Shahid Yusuf. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
 
Meltzer, Alan. 2000. Report of the International Financial Institution Advisory 
Commission. Submitted to the US Congress and US Department of the Treasury, March 
8. 
 
Minton-Beddoes, Zanny. 1999. From EMU to AMU? The Case for Regional Currency 
Blocs. Foreign Affairs. Vol. 78. 
 
Mishkin, Frederic. 2000. Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market Countries. NBER 
Working Paper 7618, March. 
 
Mundell, Robert. 1961. A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas. American Economic 
Review vol. 51 (November):509-517. 
 
Mussa, Michael, James Boughton, and Peter Isard, eds. 1996. The Future of the SDR in 
Light of Changes in the International Financial System. Washington, DC: International 
Monetary Fund. 
 
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates.  
Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, no.4 (Fall):73-96. 
  
Ogawa, Eiji, and Takatoshi Ito. 2000. On the Desirability of a Regional Currency Basket. 
NBER Working Paper 8002, November. 
 
Ogawa, Eiji, and Lijian Sun. 2002. How Were Capital Flows Stimulated under the Dollar 
Peg System. In Regional and Global Capital Flows: Macroeconomic Causes and 
Consequences, edited by Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger. 151-190. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 
 
Ohno, Kenichi. 1999. Exchange Rate Management in Developing Asia. Working Paper 1 
(January), Asian Development Bank Institute. 
 
Park, Yung Chul, and Won Am Park. 1990. Exchange Rate Policy for the East Asian 
NICs. Working Paper 9010, Korea Development Institute. 
 
Parsley, David, and Shangjin Wei. 2001. Limiting Currency Volatility to Stimulate 
Goods Market Integration. NBER Working Paper 8468, September. 
 
Reinhart, Carmen. 2000. The Mirage of Floating Exchange Rates. American Economic 
Review 90 (2):65-70. 
 
Reinhart, Carmen, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2002. The Modern History of Exchange Rate 
Arrangements: A Reinterpretation. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
 34
 
Rogoff, Kenneth. 1985.  ?The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate 
Monetary Target,? Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, November, 1169-89. 
 
Rose, Andrew. 2000. One Money, One Market? The Effect of Common Currencies on 
International Trade. Economic Policy, 30, April, 9-44. 
 
Schliesser, Reinier, 2001, ?Is There a New Generation of Intermediate Exchange Rate 
Regimes for Commodity-dependent Economies?? Some Ideas for an Optimal Choice of 
Exchange Rate Regime for Venezuela,? Kennedy School of Government, March. 
 
Stein, Ernesto and Jorge Streb. 1998. Political Stabilization Cycles in High Inflation 
Economies. Journal of Development Economics, 56:159-180. 
 
???. 1999. Elections and the Timing of Devaluations. Working paper, InterAmerican 
Development Bank. 
 
Summers, Lawrence. 1999a. Testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations 
Subcommittee on International Economic Policy and Export/Trade Promotion, January 
27. 
 
???. 1999b. Building an International Financial Architecture for the 21st Century. 
Cato Journal, 18(3):321-330. 
 
Svensson, Lars, 1995, ?The Swedish Experience of an Inflation Target,?  in Inflation 
Targets, edited by Leo Leiderman and Lars Svensson (Centre for Economic Policy 
Research: London). 
 
Takagi, Shinji. 1988. A Basket Policy: Operational Issues for Developing Countries. 
World Development, 16(2):271-79. 
 
Tavlas, George. 1992. "The 'New' Theory of Optimal Currency Areas," International 
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 
 
Williamson, John. 1996. The Crawling Band as an Exchange Rate Regime: Lessons from 
Chile, Colombia, and Israel, Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics. 
 
???. 1999. The Case for a Common Basket Peg for East Asian Countries. In 
Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Asian Countries, edited by Stefan Collignon, Jean 
Pisani-Ferry, and Yung Chul Park. 327-343. London: Routledge. 
 
???. 2001. The Case for a Basket, Band and Crawl (BBC) Regime for East Asia. In 
Future Directions for Monetary Policies in East Asia, edited by David Gruen and John 
Simon. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia. 
 35
Table 1: Estimated Effects of Adopting the Dollar or the Euro on Trade and Output 
   
Actual Data Estimated Impacts  
Country  Trade with: Trade effect: GDP effect:  
 Openness $ zone ? zone
Adopt 
$ 
Adopt 
? 
Adopt 
$ 
Adopt 
? 
 
% of 
GDP % % 
% of 
GDP
% of 
GDP
% of 
GDP 
%of 
GDP 
Largest non-$/? 
partner (% trade)
Albania 47 3 75 51 153 1 35   
Algeria 59 13 62 82 169 8 36   
Angola 110 50 34 275 222 54 37   
Bangladesh 37 20 21 59 60 7 8   
Belize 103 44 8 239 128 45 8   
Brazil 15 23 24 25 26 3 4   
Burundi 33 7 75 40 107 2 25   
Cambodia 80 2 8 85 99 2 6 Singapore (33)
Chile 55 21 17 90 83 11 9   
People?s 
Republic of 
China 40 13 11 56 53 5 4 
Hong Kong, China 
(30)
Colombia 36 38 18 77 55 14 6   
Congo (Zaire) 59 13 57 82 160 8 33   
Costa Rica 86 53 17 223 130 45 14   
Djibouti 99 3 38 108 212 3 37   
Dominican Rep. 63 76 7 207 76 47 4   
Egypt 53 18 38 82 113 9 20   
Eq'l Guinea 154 21 45 251 362 32 69   
Ethiopia 38 12 53 52 98 5 20   
Fiji 115 10 4 150 129 11 5 Australia (34)
Gambia 132 2 51 140 334 3 67   
Ghana 60 12 40 82 132 7 24   
Guinea 48 15 56 70 129 7 27   
Guyana 211 28 12 388 287 58 25   
Haiti 36 67 13 108 50 24 5   
Honduras 91 52 17 233 137 47 15   
Hungary 76 4 71 85 238 3 53   
Iceland 67 11 34 89 135 7 23   
India 28 17 29 42 52 5 8   
Indonesia 52 13 15 72 75 7 8 Japan (25)
Iran 36 1 40 37 79 0 14   
Israel 69 25 38 121 148 17 26   
Jamaica 136 53 9 352 173 71 12   
Jordan 126 7 24 152 217 9 30   
Kenya 73 6 35 86 150 4 25   
Republic of 67 22 11 111 89 15 7   
 36
Actual Data Estimated Impacts  
Country  Trade with: Trade effect: GDP effect:  
 Openness $ zone ? zone
Adopt 
$ 
Adopt 
? 
Adopt 
$ 
Adopt 
? 
 
% of 
GDP % % 
% of 
GDP
% of 
GDP
% of 
GDP 
%of 
GDP 
Largest non-$/? 
partner (% trade)
Korea
Kuwait 104 19 24 163 179 20 25   
Lao PDRa 61 2 16 65 90 1 10 Thailand (53)
Lebanon 77 12 51 105 195 9 39  
Madagascar 55 4 55 62 146 2 30  
Malawi 73 8 26 91 130 6 19 South Africa (31)
Malaysia 194 17 10 293 252 33 19 Singapore (24)
Mauritania 112 5 60 129 314 6 67  
Mauritius 122 1 36 126 254 1 43  
Mexico 59 79 6 199 70 46 4  
Mongolia 106 8 17 131 160 8 18 China (30)
Morocco 61 5 59 70 169 3 36  
Mozambique 88 7 22 106 146 6 19 South Africa (47)
Myanmar 3 3 5 3 3 0 0 Singapore (24)
Nepal 59 12 22 80 98 7 13  
Nicaragua 91 38 16 195 135 34 14  
Nigeria 30 35 34 62 61 10 10  
Pakistan 36 12 20 49 58 4 7  
Papua New 
Guinea 103 3 11 112 137 3 11 Australia (36)
Paraguay 48 19 8 75 60 9 4 Brazil (32)
Peru 28 24 18 48 43 7 5  
Philippines 81 24 10 139 105 19 8  
Poland 50 3 60 55 140 1 30  
Romania 59 4 62 66 169 2 36  
Rwanda 36 23 50 61 90 8 18  
Saudi Arabia 72 20 21 115 117 14 15  
Seychelles 104 0 16 104 154 0 16 Yemen (20)
Sierra Leone 39 14 54 55 102 5 21  
Singapore 356 16 10 527 463 56 35  
South Africa 50 10 29 65 94 5 14  
Sri Lanka 82 17 16 124 121 14 13  
Tanzania 63 6 26 74 112 4 16  
Thailand 90 14 13 128 125 12 12 Japan (24)
Trinidad & 
Tobago 97 42 9 219 123 40 9  
Tunisia 93 3 75 101 302 3 69  
Turkey 44 9 46 56 105 4 20  
Uganda 32 4 58 36 88 1 18  
 37
Actual Data Estimated Impacts  
Country  Trade with: Trade effect: GDP effect:  
 Openness $ zone ? zone
Adopt 
$ 
Adopt 
? 
Adopt 
$ 
Adopt 
? 
 
% of 
GDP % % 
% of 
GDP
% of 
GDP
% of 
GDP 
%of 
GDP 
Largest non-$/? 
partner (% trade)
Uruguay 38 9 18 48 59 3 7 Brazil (29)
Venezuela 48 50 10 120 62 24 5  
Viet Nam 83 4 16 93 123 3 13 Japan (19)
Yemen 73 7 13 88 101 5 9 
Republic of Korea 
(14)
Zambia 91 5 17 105 137 5 15 South Africa (22)
Zimbabwe 91 4 21 102 148 4 19 South Africa (36)
Averageb 73 19 29 114 134 13 20  
 
Notes:  
(i) Assumptions: currency union triples trade; .33 effect of openness on GDP. 
(ii)The estimation, which uses 1995 trade date, is described in Frankel and Rose (2002).    
(iii)This version of the table is based on the Kennedy School working paper version, 
RWP01-013, April 2001.   
 
a  Lao People?s Democratic Republic. 
b Industrialized countries that float are included in the average, but not reported in the 
table. 
Source: Frankel and Rose (2002), working paper version.
 38
Table 2: Three Empirical Studies of Growth Rates Across Regimes 
 
 
Ghosh, 
Gulde, & 
Wolf (2000) 
Average Growth Rate 
(1975-1996) 
Growth (per capita) Coefficient, 
Conditioned 
     All Countries Lower-income   All 
 GDP Per Capita GDP Per Capita Per Capita 
Float 3.1 1.7 3.6 1.4 norm=0 
Currency 
board 
4.0 3.1 2.9 2.2 +2.1 ** 
Regular peg 3.3 0.9 3.3 0.5 -0.8 *** 
 
  
Levy-Yeyati 
& 
Sturzenegger 
(2002) 2201 
in Ref, pls 
check 
Average Growth Rate 
per capita 
(1974-2000) 
Growth (per capita) Coefficient, 
Conditioned 
   All Countries Non-industrial All Countries Non-
industrial
 IMF LYS LYS IMF LYS LYS 
Float 1.0 1.9 1.7 Norm = 0 
Fix 1.2 1.5 1.3 - 0.3 - 0.8 ** -1.1 ** 
Intermediate 2.0 1.0 1.5 +0.5 * - 1.0 *** -1.2 *** 
  
Reinhart & 
Rogoff (2002) 
Average Growth Rate (per capita) 
All Countries (1970-2001) 
 Standard Excluding Dual 
Rates 
Free float 0.5 1.1 
Peg 1.4 1.7 
Limitedflexibi
lity 
2.2 2.6 
Managed float 1.9 1.5 
 
 
IMF = International Monetary Fund, LYS = Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger system. 
Note: Significant at (*) 10 % level, (**) 5% level, and (***)1% level. 
 39
 
Table 3: Correlations Among Regime Classification Schemes 
(Frequency of outright coincidence, in percentage, is given in parenthesis.) 
 
 IMF Ghosh LY-S R-R 
IMF 1.00 (100.0)    
Ghosh 0.60 (55.1) 
1.00 
(100.0)   
LY-S 0.28 (41.0) 
0.13 
(35.3) 
1.00 
(100.0)  
R-R 0.33 (55.1) 
0.34 
(35.2) 
0.41 
(45.3) 
1.00 
(100.0) 
 
 
The table shows the correlations and percentage of coincidences between four systems of 
annual classification of exchange rate regimes: IMF (end-of-period values); Ghosh, 
Gulde, Ostry, and Wolf (Ghosh); Levy Yeyati and Sturzenegger (LY-S); and Reinhart 
and Rogoff (R-R). The sample includes 47 countries: Argentina, Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican 
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hong 
Kong, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, 
Mauritius, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Philippines, Portugal, 
Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, United 
Kingdom, Uruguay, and Venezuela. The period considered is 1974-1998 for the IMF 
classification, 1974-1995 for the Ghosh classification, and 1974-2000 for the LY-S and 
R-R classifications. Exchange rate regimes are classified as fixed, intermediate, or 
floating. The R-R classification was collapsed into these three categories according to the 
Appendix Table. 
 
Sources for classifications: IMF; Ghosh, Gulde, Ostry, & Wolf (1996); Levy Yeyati & 
Sturzenegger (2000); and Reinhart & Rogoff (2002).  Table prepared by Marina Halac & 
Sergio Schmukler. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

