  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ROBERT SCHUMAN CENTRE FOR ADVANCED STUDIES
Leonardo Meeus
WHY (AND HOW) TO REGULATE POWER EXCHANGES IN THE 
EU MARKET INTEGRATION CONTEXT?
EUI Working Papers
RSCAS 2010/12
ROBERT SCHUMAN CENTRE FOR ADVANCED STUDIES
Florence School of Regulation

  
EUROPEAN UNIVERSITY INSTITUTE, FLORENCE 
ROBERT SCHUMAN CENTRE FOR ADVANCED STUDIES 
FLORENCE SCHOOL OF REGULATION
Why (and how) to regulate Power Exchanges in the EU market integration context? 
LEONARDO MEEUS
EUI Working Paper RSCAS 2010/12
 
 
This text may be downloaded only for personal research purposes. Additional reproduction for other 
purposes, whether in hard copies or electronically, requires the consent of the author(s), editor(s).  
If cited or quoted, reference should be made to the full name of the author(s), editor(s), the title, the 
working paper, or other series, the year and the publisher. 
 
 
 
ISSN 1028-3625 
© 2010 Leonardo Meeus 
Printed in Italy, March 2010 
European University Institute 
Badia Fiesolana 
I – 50014 San Domenico di Fiesole (FI) 
Italy 
www.eui.eu/RSCAS/Publications/ 
www.eui.eu 
cadmus.eui.eu 
  
 
Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies 
The Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies (RSCAS), directed by Stefano Bartolini since 
September 2006, is home to a large post-doctoral programme. Created in 1992, it aims to develop 
inter-disciplinary and comparative research and to promote work on the major issues facing the 
process of integration and European society. 
The Centre hosts major research programmes and projects, and a range of working groups and ad hoc 
initiatives. The research agenda is organised around a set of core themes and is continuously evolving, 
reflecting the changing agenda of European integration and the expanding membership of the 
European Union.  
Details of this and the other research of the Centre can be found on:  
http://www.eui.eu/RSCAS/Research/ 
Research publications take the form of Working Papers, Policy Papers, Distinguished Lectures and 
books. Most of these are also available on the RSCAS website:  
http://www.eui.eu/RSCAS/Publications/ 
The EUI and the RSCAS are not responsible for the opinion expressed by the author(s).  
Florence School of Regulation 
The Florence School of Regulation (FSR) is a partnership between the RSCAS at the EUI and the 
Council of the European Energy Regulators (CEER), and it works closely with the European 
Commission. The Florence School of Regulation is sponsored by leading European energy companies.
The objectives of the FSR are to promote informed discussion of key issues; to provide state-of-the-art 
training for practitioners; and to produce analytical studies in the field of regulation. It is a European 
forum dedicated to economic regulation. While its primary focus is on energy regulation, particularly 
in the electricity and gas markets, it is extending its coverage to other areas of regulation. 
This series of working papers aims at disseminating the work of scholars and practitioners on current 
regulatory issues. 
 
For further information 
Florence School of Regulation 
Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies 
European University Institute 
Via Boccaccio, 151 
I-50133 Firenze 
Tel.: +39 055 4685 751 
Fax: +39055 4685755 
E-mail: fsr@eui.eu 
http://www.eui.eu/RSCAS/ProfessionalDevelopment/FSR/ 

  
Abstract 
Power Exchanges (PXs) are key market institutions in open and market-based electricity industries. 
This paper aims at contributing to the ongoing debate on why and how to regulate Power Exchanges in 
the EU market integration context.  
The paper starts by stating that two different types of PXs have to be distinguished, i.e. “Merchant” 
PXs and the “Cost of Service Regulated” PXs. The paper continues by comparing the typical 
incentives of these two types of PXs to perform the basic PX tasks in an isolated national market and 
in a market integration context. The paper concludes by deriving from this analytical frame the most 
relevant regulatory actions. 
Keywords 
Regulation, Exchanges, Grid access, Power Markets 

 1 
Introduction* 
Power Exchanges (PXs) are key market institutions in open and market-based electricity industries. 
This paper aims at contributing to the ongoing debate on why and how to regulate Power Exchanges in 
the EU market integration context.  
The paper starts by stating that two different types of PXs have to be distinguished, i.e. “Merchant” 
PXs and the “Cost of Service Regulated” PXs. The paper continues by comparing the typical 
incentives of these two types of PXs to perform the basic PX tasks in an isolated national market and 
in a market integration context. The paper concludes by deriving from this analytical frame the most 
relevant regulatory actions. 
Two types of PXs 
Power trading (financial and physical) in the EU has reached the threefold of annual consumption 
(over 8 million GWh traded in 2007 for a 2.7 million GWh level of consumption)1. In terms of 
physical exchanges, 10% of total trade and 30% of consumption is traded on Power Exchanges (PXs). 
The traditional market for PXs is an auction organized every day around midday to execute orders for 
the delivery of electrical energy the next day. Some PXs have also started organizing trade before the 
day-ahead stage (e.g. financial “futures” products) and after the day-ahead stage (“intra-day”), but the 
focus in this paper is on the traditional day-ahead PX market. Two types of PXs have to be 
distinguished in Europe because they can be expected not to behave the same way in the operation of 
their typical exchange tasks. They are (Figure 1): 
• Merchant PXs: being for-profit market institutions whose income depends on the users they have 
(i.e. user registration fees, and annual membership fees) and the volume of trade executed by the 
PX for its users (i.e. commissions on the traded volumes). Merchant PXs are mostly private 
initiatives that compete with other exchanges and bilateral or over-the-counter markets (OTC). 
Providing trade services is their core business. Examples of Merchant PXs include APX (the 
Netherlands), Belpex (Belgium), EPEX (Germany and France), Nord Pool (Nordic region), OTE 
(Czech Republic), PolPX (Poland), etc. 
• Cost of Service (CoS) Regulated PXs: being not-for-profit or regulated-profit market institutions 
whose income depends on approved costs for approved tasks. Like Merchant PXs, some of them 
charge fees to their members, but these fees are approved by the regulator or the ministry. CoS 
Regulated PXs are typically public initiatives that perform several tasks. For instance in Spain, 
OMEL has the additional task of allocating capacity payments, which is a public incentive 
scheme designed to promote generation adequacy. In Italy, GME has the additional task to 
manage internal congestions in the country. In Greece and Ireland, the CoS Regulated PXs are 
dispatching power plants. 
                                                     
* This work has been supported by the French Energy Regulatory Authority, CRE. The analysis and conclusions are of 
course the sole responsibility of the author. 
1 The 2008 review of EU wholesale energy markets, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/energy/gas_electricity/studies  
Leonardo Meeus 
2 
Figure 1: Different types of PXs across Europe2 
 
Boisseleau (2004) discusses that in countries without a public initiative to set-up a CoS Regulated PX, 
Merchant PXs have been created following initiatives from various private entities, including: 
• Market parties: e.g. APX (the Netherlands) was founded in 1999 by energy companies active in 
the Netherlands, which could have been motivated by their interest in reducing transaction costs. 
Note that later APX became subsidiary of the Dutch TSO Tennet, while keeping its for-profit 
status. 
• Financial market institutions: e.g. EEX (Germany) was founded in 1999 by the exchange group 
Eurex, which could have been motivated by its interest in leveraging its competence from 
running financial markets. 
• Transmission System Operators (TSO): e.g. Nord Pool (originally Norway, and later the whole 
Nordic region) was founded in 1996 by the Norwegian TSO Statnett. 
• A combination of the above: e.g. Powernext (France) was founded in 2001 by the exchange 
group NYSE Euronext and the French TSO RTE, with several French utilities and banks having 
a smaller share. The French TSO could have been motivated by the regulatory obligation to 
procure losses that is imposed on many TSOs in Europe, often making them the largest 
electricity consumer. 
Most countries in Europe have one PX, but there are or have been several cases of competing PXs in 
the same country (like in Germany and the UK). PXs operating in different countries are executing 
orders for different products because they imply commitments to withdraw from or inject into the 
network of that country. This does however not prevent a PX from one country to also offer its 
services in another country. There have been several cases, like Nord Pool that founded the Leipzig 
Power Exchange (LPX) in 2000, which competed in Germany with EEX until they merged in 2002. 
                                                     
2 Based on the limited available information on the PX websites. 
Why (and how) to regulate Power Exchanges in the EU market integration context? 
3 
PX incentives to behave in a national isolated market 
The Merchant PXs’ case in a national isolated market 
Interests in analyzing financial markets have contributed to analyzing power exchanges. Lee (2010) is 
a typical case of such contributions. He does notice that there is a widespread presumption that the for-
profit model is the best governance structure for an exchange, while he also warns that potential 
benefits may not materialize and that there may be significant cons associated with the for-profit 
model.  
The most important of the cons arises when the PX has a dominant position in the provision of one 
or more of its market services, and succeeds in exploiting its market power to act anti-competitively. 
As discussed by other authors, including Oesterle et al. (1992), McInish and Wood (1996), Pirrong 
(1999, 2000), and Lee (2010), anti-competitive behavior can consist of cartelizing the supply of 
trading services, passing self-interested and inefficient rules, deterring access to the exchange, 
deterring competition, or practicing monopoly pricing.  
Exchanges can have natural monopoly characteristics. First, trading systems can benefit from a 
positive “network externality” because liquidity attracts liquidity. Second, significant economies of 
scale have been demonstrated in empirical work on exchanges, e.g. by Malkamäki (1999), Hasan and 
Malkamäki (2001), and Schaper (2009).  
Furthermore laws and regulations can create or reinforce the market power of Merchant PXs. 
Examples include (Frontier3, 2005; EC Sector Inquiry4, 2006): 
• Prudential regulations: while such regulations may be needed to protect market parties trading 
on the PX from a financial failure of market participants, they also reinforce the incumbent PXs 
by making it more costly to enter into the business of exchange services. Prudential regulations 
are typical financial market regulations, but for instance in Germany and the UK, the PX spot 
markets are subject to these financial market regulations.  
• Liquidity supporting measures: while providing a reliable price reference can be considered as a 
public service that might need to be supported with liquidity supporting measures, these 
measures typically target the incumbent PX, and thereby can reinforce its market power. For 
instance in the Dutch market, there is an obligation for importers being active at the day-ahead 
stage to trade on the incumbent PX. In the Nordic market, market parties have to transact via the 
incumbent PX to get access to interconnection capacity.   
• Cooperation with Transmission System Operator (e.g. ownership): while it may be beneficial for 
the ongoing market integration process in the EU (see discussion in the next session), deep 
cooperation with the Transmission System Operator (TSO) can also reinforce the market power 
of the incumbent PX. The TSO can be a very big customer due to the common regulatory 
requirement for the procurement of losses. The TSO - PX cooperation can also imply that the 
incumbent PX monopolizes certain services. For instance in the Czech market, the incumbent 
PX is organizing the balancing market in cooperation with the TSO. 
The Cost of Service Regulated PXs’ case in a national isolated market 
The fact is that there has been little regulation to control prices and/or service levels of exchanges in 
financial markets (Lee, 2010). On the contrary in power markets, CoS Regulated PXs are not 
                                                     
3 Regulation of power exchanges, a report prepared for DTe by Frontier Economics. 
4 DG COMP report, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/competition/sectors/energy/inquiry/index.html 
Leonardo Meeus 
4 
uncommon. As illustrated in Figure 1, there are 8 markets that have a PX with some form of CoS 
Regulation, while 15 markets have Merchant PXs. CoS Regulated PXs by definition have fewer 
incentives to abuse market power than Merchant PXs, but they also have fewer incentives to provide 
an efficient trading service, or to innovate in trading systems.  
Lee (2010) lists various costs that may arise when such a model is adopted by a market institution. 
It includes: 
• Costs of the services provided may not be efficiently managed 
• Decision-making at the PX may be cumbersome and expensive 
• It may be hard to incentivize management to perform better 
Resulting potential for regulatory actions in a national isolated market 
Table 1 summarizes the relative pros and cons of the two types of PXs in an isolated market, as 
discussed in the previous paragraphs. In such a closed market, PXs do not have to cooperate with each 
other; each one can sell its services on its own footing. In this context, Merchant PXs can be better at 
providing efficient services to their users while they also can try to exert their market power if any. It 
results in this typical structure of incentives and behavior where both type of PX may have pros and 
cons.  
Table 1: isolated market incentives comparison 
Incentives to CoS Regulated PX Merchant PX 
Provide efficient services - + 
Abuse market power + - 
However regulation can act to correct the expected behavior and outcome. Promising regulatory 
actions to improve the incentive frame of Merchant PXs are: 
• Regulatory requirement for transparency on pre- and post-trade data (prices, volumes, etc). A 
merchant PX can have an incentive to restrict transparency to lower the capacity of its users to 
oversight its operation. Regulatory transparency requirements can help avoid that the PX 
restricts transparency to deter the effect of competition. Note that without such a requirement, 
the PX will anyway be somewhat transparent to attract enough trading, but not necessarily as 
transparent as possible. 
• Carefully design liquidity supporting measures. Forcing transactions via a Merchant PX is a 
questionable measure to deal with structural liquidity problems, especially when alternative 
measures could be used to tackle these problems. This includes targeting lack of interconnection, 
excessive concentration in generation, complete integration of supply with generation, etc. The 
PX itself can also be a problem, for instance when its offer in terms of price and quality is not 
attracting enough trade vis-à-vis OTC trading.  
Why (and how) to regulate Power Exchanges in the EU market integration context? 
5 
PX incentives to behave in a market integration context 
Exchange of energy and access to grid capacity are two related but distinct commodities. Auctioning 
the access to interconnection separately from the energy market auctions has proven to create 
inefficiencies because the access rights are frequently underused or misused, even though they are 
scarce (e.g. Newbery and Mcdaniel, 2002; CRE5, 2009).  
Moreover the uses of interconnections part of a network are physically interdependent following 
the Kirchhoff laws of power flows. Consensus is then growing in the EU that the use of connection 
access rights needs to be coordinated with the coupling of the day-ahead auctions organized by PXs in 
order to better eliminate inefficiencies. At the last Florence Forum,6 a target model was presented and 
welcomed by PXs proposing to cooperate to implement it. The PX incentives have then to be re-
examined in this context.  
Merchant PXs’ case in a market integration context 
The new EU target model implies that trade across borders at the day-ahead stage will be transacted as 
a bundle “energy – access capacity” via the PXs. A Merchant PX therefore has a clear incentive to 
cooperate in the implementation of this model as it can generate significant additional trade volumes 
and thus income for the PX. 
However, the new EU target model can also reinforce the market power of PXs which can hamper 
the potential benefits. First, market power could be reinforced because the needed cooperation among 
PXs implies that they have to cartelize the supply of trading services and to monopolize the operation 
of trade across borders. Second, the potential benefits may not materialize because eliminating 
existing cross-border trade inefficiencies is far from trivial. For instance in the Dome Coupling 
initiative7 the potential benefits did not materialize - at least initially - because the involved PXs did 
not coordinate the calculation of their prices, and did not harmonize sufficiently their operation 
(FGH/IAEW8, 2009). A sufficiently efficient arrangement on these issues may not be obvious for all 
existing PXs for the following reasons. 
• To coordinate prices calculation. Many PXs followed by their association Europex insist on a 
decentralized approach which can go up to avoid having to coordinate the calculation of their 
prices. One can presume that they consider as their exclusive business the manner with which 
they set the price in their zone9.  
• To harmonize operation. Harmonizing can be costly and is frequently unevenly costly (or 
beneficial) for all partners. It is then not necessarily easy to implement in a decentralized process 
of convergence among PXs. Harmonizing PX price caps for instance is not necessarily included 
in a coordination initiative, while it causes cross-border trade inefficiencies. 
                                                     
5 Management and use of electric interconnections in 2008, available at: http://www.cre.fr 
6 The Electricity Regulatory Forum, or Florence Forum, was set up in 1998 to discuss the creation of a true internal 
electricity market. Consensus was reached at the XVII meeting: 
http://ec.europa.eu/energy/gas_electricity/forum_electricity_florence_en.htm 
7 A cooperation between Nord Pool (Nordic region) and EEX (Germany) operational since September 2008. 
8 Report on Supervision of Tests and Evaluation of a System for Market Coupling operated by EMCC, available at: 
http://www.marketcoupling.com. 
9 It started with the 2003 paper: “using implicit auctions to manage cross-border congestion: decentralized market 
coupling”, and see for instance also the 2009 paper: “development and Implementation of a coordinated model for 
regional and inter-regional congestion management”. All these papers are available at www.europex.org. 
Leonardo Meeus 
6 
Cost of Service Regulated PXs’s case in a market integration context 
Cooperating with another PX to eliminate cross-border trade inefficiencies could in principle be just 
another regulated task for the CoS Regulated PX. However exactly here we do suffer a “regulatory 
gap” in Europe.  
As discussed in Vasconcelos (2005), the achievement and operation of the EU internal energy 
market is a common European regulatory task, but the corresponding regulatory function is not 
assigned to a European wide regulatory entity. When dealing with problems related to cross-border 
trade, the national regulatory authorities frequently do not have effective and independent powers to 
define and enforce the needed regulation at EU level.  
Each regulator would need to act in interaction with its own national decision-making process, 
introducing coherent modifications of the CoS Regulated PXs’ task frame at the same time in the 
entire EU to achieve market integration through this model. 
Potential for regulatory actions in a market integration context 
Table 2 summarizes the relative positive and negative points of the two types of PXs in a context of 
market integration, as discussed in the previous paragraphs. One may think that when integrating 
markets, eliminating cross-border trade inefficiencies appear as a new criterion along with providing 
efficient other trading services and not abusing market power. Again no model of PX provides an 
absolutely perfect picture for all the relevant criteria. 
Table 2: integrated market incentives comparison 
Incentives to CoS Regulated PX Merchant PX 
Provide efficient services - + 
Eliminate cross-border trade 
inefficiencies 
- + 
Abuse market power + - 
However some regulatory measures can mitigate this or that possibly bad outcome. A promising 
regulatory action here to counter the reinforced market power from implementing the new EU target 
model could be to combine PX and OTC in the allocation of the interconnection capacity. 
• Long-term explicit auctions. If TSOs would at least initially continue to offer part of the physical 
rights to trade across their borders in separate auctions (the “explicit auctions”) 10, OTC markets 
could continue to provide physical customized trading services across borders. Following Lee 
(2010), there is a common belief about the importance of OTC in competing (e.g. Nystedt, 2004) 
and complementing (e.g. Kroszner, 1999) organized exchanges. Note also that 90% of total trade 
in Europe is OTC, with the main exception being the Nordic region where it is only half of trade 
(there are no explicit auctions in this region) 11.  
Another set of promising regulatory actions to help materialize the potential benefits of the EU target 
model (i.e. elimination of the cross-border trade inefficiencies) could be of interest. 
                                                     
10 The alternative is to have long term financial transmission rights so that all physical rights would be reserved for PXs. 
This would improve the liquidity of PXs, goes the argument, but this would then be another liquidity supporting measure 
that would need to be carefully designed and that would re-open the debate on regulation of PXs. 
11 The 2008 review of EU wholesale energy markets, available at: http://ec.europa.eu/energy/gas_electricity/studies  
Why (and how) to regulate Power Exchanges in the EU market integration context? 
7 
• Regulated price properties. In the Trilateral Market Coupling (TLC) initiative,12 stakeholders 
had agreed with regulators on a set of price properties that the coordination initiative would 
comply with: e.g. prices have to be equal if there is unused capacity, etc. The properties were 
defined so that the initiative should eliminate all cross-border trade inefficiencies, which it then 
also did. Note however that the optimal properties for a Pan-European coordination initiative 
will be different from the ones used for TLC. Of course France, Belgium and the Netherlands are 
interconnected with a connection between France and Belgium and between Belgium and the 
Netherlands, but the Netherlands and France are not directly connected and therefore there is no 
mesh. As discussed in Meeus et al. (2009), in meshed networks with flow based network 
constraints, price properties are more complicated to define, and several sets of optimal prices 
may exist. However the properties would have to be defined and regulated. 
• Minimum prerequisites. Pre-requisites for the implementation of the target model have already 
been suggested at the Florence Forum. They include: use of a single pricing algorithm, 
harmonized gate closure times, sharing of all bid data between PXs, compatible bids/products, 
etc. The experience with Dome Coupling however indicates that there are many factors that can 
contribute to inefficiency so it could be difficult to make a good working list of prerequisites. 
Considering however, that regulators will need to regulate the price properties of the initiative 
coming from PXs, a prerequisite could be that the costs of setting up and running the initiative 
are covered by the regulated tariffs, as in the TLC initiative.13 This was not the case in the Dome 
Coupling initiative (there are no regulated price properties for Dome Coupling).  
• Apply netting at the day-ahead stage. In the TLC initiative, TSOs have continued to organize 
separate auctions for long term rights to trade across their borders. At the day-ahead stage, the 
TSOs calculate the available capacity, deduct the capacity they have already auctioned, and add 
the part of that capacity that has not yet been used. This remaining capacity is then used by the 
PXs to coordinate the execution of their day-ahead orders books. There are still inefficient 
nominations from the long term auctions, but the TSOs apply “netting” so that inefficient 
nominations before the day-ahead stage simply increase the remaining capacity at the day-ahead 
stage.  
                                                     
12 Cooperation between Powernext (France), Belpex (Belgium) and APX (the Netherlands) operational since November 
2006 
13 In this initiative, the costs have been invoiced by the PXs to the TSOs so that it could then be considered as an approved 
cost by the regulators to be added to the transmission tariff. 
Leonardo Meeus 
8 
Conclusions 
In the EU market integration context, why and how to regulate Power Exchanges (PXs) can be 
provocatively rephrased as why and how to regulate a closed “cartel” of “incumbent” and “merchant” 
PXs that is proposing to “monopolize” the organization of trade across borders.  
Even though building such a cartel is questionable from an economical point of view, it is likely to 
be the only institutionally feasible way to eliminate the significant cross-border trade inefficiencies 
that Europe is currently experiencing.  
It is true that a theoretical alternative could be to adopt the Cost of Service Regulated PX model all 
over Europe because such a PX has no profit incentives to abuse the monopoly of cross-border trade. 
However it will require having all of them perfectly regulated, while coordinating and harmonizing 
across borders is far from just another regulated task in a mainly national regulatory frame. 
It is not an accident that merchant PXs are already organizing trade across borders in some parts of 
Europe. And there are several promising regulatory actions that could help preventing that Europe’s 
increasingly monopolistic market infrastructure would generate new trade inefficiencies. First, the 
price properties of the cross-border PX coordination initiative could be regulated to make sure that the 
potential benefits from coordination materialize. Second, the long-term rights to trade across borders 
could continue to be auctioned separately to temper the reinforced PXs’ market power. Third, netting 
at the day-ahead stage would make sure that these auctions for long term rights do not reduce the 
benefits from coordination. Fourth and last, enhanced transparency requirements and external market 
oversight could also help tempering the reinforced PX market power. 
Why (and how) to regulate Power Exchanges in the EU market integration context? 
9 
References 
Boisseleau, F., 2004, The role of power exchanges for the creation of a single, European electricity 
market: market design and market regulation, PhD dissertation, Delft University Press. 
Hasan, I., Malkamäki, M., 2001, Are expansions cost effective for stock exchanges? A global 
perspective, Journal of Banking and Finance, 25 (12), 2339-2366. 
Kroszner, R., 1999, Can the Financial Markets Privately Regulate Risk?, Journal of Money, Credit, 
and Banking, 31(3), 596–618.  
Lee, R., 2010, The Governance of Financial Market Infrastructure, Oxford Finance Group, Princeton 
University Press, Forthcoming. 
Malkamäki, M., 1999, Are there economies of scale in stock exchange activities?, Bank of Finland 
Discussion Papers 2/2003. 
McInish, T., Wood, R., 1996, Competition, fragmentation, and market quality, The Industrial 
Organization of the Securities Industry, University of Chicago Press. 
Meeus, L., Vandezande, L., Cole, S., Belmans, R., 2009, Market coupling and the importance of price 
coordination between power exchanges, Energy, 34(3), 228-234.  
Newbery, D., Mcdaniel, T., 2002, Auctions and trading in energy markets: an economic analysis, DAE 
Working Paper WP 0233. 
Nystedt, J., 2004, Derivative market competition: OTC markets versus organized derivative 
exchanges, IMF Working Paper WP/04/61. 
Oesterle, D., Winslow, D., Anderson, S., 1992, The New York stock exchange and its outmoded 
specialist system: can the exchange innovate to survive?, Journal of Corporate Law 17, 223-310. 
Pirrong, C., 1995, The self-regulation of commodity exchanges: the case of market manipulation, 
Journal of Law and Economics 38, 141-206. 
Pirrong, C., 2000, A Theory of Financial Exchange Organization, Journal of Law and Economics, 
43(2). 
Vasconcelos, J., 2005, Towards the Internal Energy Market: how to bridge a regulatory gap and build 
a regulatory framework, European Review of Energy Markets, 1(1). 
Schaper, T., 2009, Organizing Equity Exchanges, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Discussion Paper 
22/200. 
 
Leonardo Meeus 
10 
Author contacts: 
 
Leonardo Meeus 
Florence School of Regulation  
European University Institute, RSCAS 
Villa Malafrasca 
Via Boccaccio, 151 
I-50014 San Domenico di Fiesole (FI) 
Email: leonardo.meeus@eui.eu 
 
 
 

