IZA DP No. 3314
The Effects on Stature of Poverty, Family Size
and Birth Order: British Children in the 1930s
Timothy J. Hatton
Richard M. Martin
D
I
S
C
U
S
S
I
O
N
 P
A
P
E
R
 S
E
R
I
E
S
Forschungsinstitut
zur Zukunft der Arbeit
Institute for the Study
of Labor
January 2008
 
The Effects on Stature of Poverty, 
Family Size and Birth Order: 
British Children in the 1930s 
 
 
Timothy J. Hatton 
University of Essex, Australian National University 
and IZA  
 
Richard M. Martin 
University of Bristol 
 
 
 
Discussion Paper No. 3314 
January 2008 
 
 
 
IZA 
 
P.O. Box 7240   
53072 Bonn   
Germany   
 
Phone: +49-228-3894-0  
Fax: +49-228-3894-180   
E-mail: iza@iza.org
 
 
 
 
 
Any opinions expressed here are those of the author(s) and not those of IZA. Research published in 
this series may include views on policy, but the institute itself takes no institutional policy positions. 
 
The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) in Bonn is a local and virtual international research center 
and a place of communication between science, politics and business. IZA is an independent nonprofit 
organization supported by Deutsche Post World Net. The center is associated with the University of 
Bonn and offers a stimulating research environment through its international network, workshops and 
conferences, data service, project support, research visits and doctoral program. IZA engages in (i) 
original and internationally competitive research in all fields of labor economics, (ii) development of 
policy concepts, and (iii) dissemination of research results and concepts to the interested public.  
 
IZA Discussion Papers often represent preliminary work and are circulated to encourage discussion. 
Citation of such a paper should account for its provisional character. A revised version may be 
available directly from the author. 
IZA Discussion Paper No. 3314 
January 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The Effects on Stature of Poverty, Family Size and Birth Order: 
British Children in the 1930s*
 
This paper examines effects of socio-economic conditions on the standardised heights and 
body mass index of children in Interwar Britain. It uses the Boyd Orr cohort, a survey of 
predominantly poor families taken in 1937-9, which provides a unique opportunity to explore 
the determinants of child health in the era before the welfare state. We examine the trade-off 
between the quality (in the form of health outcomes) and the number of children in the family 
at a time when genuine poverty still existed in Britain. Our results provide strong support both 
for negative birth order effects and negative family size effects on the heights of children. No 
such effects are found for the body mass index (BMI). We find that household income per 
capita positively influences the heights of children but, even after accounting for this, the 
number of children in the family still has a negative effect on height. This latter effect is 
closely associated with overcrowding and particularly with the degree of cleanliness or 
hygiene in the household, which conditions exposure to factors predisposing to disease. We 
also analyse evidence collected retrospectively, which indicates that the effects of childhood 
conditions on height persisted into adulthood. 
 
 
JEL Classification: J13, I12, I31 
  
Keywords: child health, heights, poverty 
 
 
Corresponding author: 
 
Timothy J. Hatton 
School of Economics 
Australian National University 
HW Arndt Building 25a 
ACT 0200 
Australia 
E-mail: tim.hatton@anu.edu.au     
 
                
 
                                                 
* We are grateful to Alison Booth for many useful conversations and comments during the writing of 
this paper and for comments from workshop participants at Essex and seminar participants at 
Warwick. 
Introduction 
In this paper we study the effects of per capita income, family size and birth order 
on height-for-age and body mass index of children in a sample of UK households in the 
1930s. We use a unique dataset from a survey conducted in 1937-9 by the Rowett 
Research Institute at Aberdeen, to investigate the effects of poverty and housing 
conditions on the diet and health of children. This was a time when poverty was still 
widespread and when the welfare state was in its infancy. Thus we can examine these 
effects for a period when the incomes of many families were low enough, and family 
sizes large enough, to seriously limit the nutrition of children. We are also able to 
examine directly the effects of food expenditure and housing conditions on the health of 
children. Importantly, because we have data on different children within a given family 
we can look into intra-family outcomes for children.  And because we have evidence 
from a follow up survey of members of the Boyd Orr cohort we are able to analyse the 
link between childhood conditions and final attained (adult) height.  
Our results provide support both for negative birth order effects and negative 
family size effects on the heights of children. No such effects are found for body mass 
index (BMI). We find that household income per capita positively influenced the heights 
of children but even after accounting for this, the number of children in the family still 
has a negative effect on height. The key mechanisms at work appear to be the positive 
effect of per capita expenditure on food and a negative effect of crowding within the 
household. This latter effect is closely associated with the degree of cleanliness or 
hygiene in the household and we conclude that this affects height through conditioning 
the exposure to disease, which in turn limits the capacity to absorb the available food 
supply. Finally, we analyse information on heights recorded in the follow-up survey and 
find that the effects of childhood conditions on height persisted into adulthood.  
 The paper is laid out as follows. A selective review of the relevant literature is 
followed by an outline of a basic framework for the empirical work. We then briefly 
introduce our data source, the Boyd Orr cohort. The empirical analysis begins with a 
fixed effects analysis of the effect of birth order on height and BMI, and continues with a 
cross-household instrumental variables analysis of the effects of family size, both in the 
absence and in the presence of per capita income. The following two sections we explore 
 2
the mechanisms at work on child health at the household level by examining the effects 
of food expenditure and housing conditions. Finally we examine the persistence of these 
effects by using retrospective data to estimate the effects of childhood conditions on the 
adult heights of cohort members. The results are summed up in a brief conclusion.  
 
Background 
 There has been considerable interest in the effects of household composition and 
socio-economic status on the welfare of children and on their later life chances. A 
number of studies have investigated the effects of family size and birth order on the 
outcomes for children in order to test the idea of a trade-off between the quantity and 
quality of children. The essential framework is that of human capital theory, as originally 
applied in a household setting by Becker and Lewis (1973) and Becker and Tomes 
(1976). The basic idea is that parents obtain utility from the quantity and the quality of 
children and that they maximise their utility subject to a budget constraint. Since 
investment in child quality consumes resources (goods and time) there is a trade-off 
along the budget constraint between the number of children and average child quality.  
 Most of the existing research has focused on the relationship between the number 
of siblings in the family and their educational outcomes. In one of the more influential 
studies Hanusheck  (1992) found that the test scores for low-income families in Gary, 
Indiana were inversely related to the number of children in the family but not to birth 
order. More recently Booth and Kee (2007) find that the completed education-level for a 
sample of British adults is inversely related to the number of siblings and also inversely 
related to the individual’s birth order. In a study of young Norwegian adults, Black et al. 
(2005) find strong negative birth order effects on education but no effect for family size. 
By contrast, in a study of children and young adults in the Philippines, Ejrnæs and 
Pörtner (2004) find a strong positive birth order effect on completed education and time 
spent on school activities, although they do not investigate family size effects.  
 Two key methodological issues have emerged in the more recent studies. The first 
is that of estimating the effects of birth order independently of family size. Since children 
with low birth order will on average be from smaller families there is a natural correlation 
between birth order and family size. Booth and Kee (2007) construct a birth order index 
 3
which is independent of family size while Black et al. (2005) estimate birth order effects 
for given family sizes and Ejrnæs and Pörtner estimate across siblings using family fixed 
effects. The second issue is how to estimate family size effects when family size and 
child outcomes may include common unobserved effects. Booth and Kee (2007) use 
region of residence and age difference between parents as instruments for the number of 
children in the completed family. A number of studies including Black et al. (2005) 
follow Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1980) in using the incidence of twin births on the 
grounds that this is an exogenous source of variation to family size.  
Although most of the existing work has focused on education as an outcome that 
reflects investment in children, a number of studies have investigated the health status of 
children. The trade-off between the number of children and their health status may be 
particularly stark for low-income families in developing countries. One of the key 
outcomes is height, which is sensitive to nutritional status, especially during early 
childhood. While short stature is often interpreted as reflecting the cumulative effects 
nutritional deficiency, low BMI is seen as reflecting short-run shocks to nutrition. In a 
sample of children in the Philippines, Horton (1988) found strong negative effects of 
birth order on height-for age but only modest effects on weight-for-height. These effects 
are consistent with results on the allocation of nutrients by birth order to children in rural 
India reported by Behrman (1988).  A number of studies have also identified negative 
family size effects on height as well as on a variety of other health indicators for children 
in developing countries, although they typically do not account for the endogeneity of 
family size. In one recent study of Romanian children Glick et al. (2006) find that twin 
births significantly increase family size and negatively affect the standardised heights of 
other siblings in the family. 
Research in the UK context has focused on the National Child Development 
Study (NCDS), which comprises all children born between the 3rd and 9th of March 
1958.1 Li and Power (2004) find that the heights of these children at the age of 7 were 
negatively related to birth order and also to the number of younger siblings as well as 
being influenced by the social class of the household head and the number of persons per 
                                                 
1 For a wide-ranging account of trends observed in the NCDS, see Wadsworth (1991); earlier studies of 
height at age seven in the NCDS include Goldstein (1971) and Fogelman (1975).  
 4
room in the household. Interestingly, they find that these effects are generally much 
smaller for the children of the original cohort, suggesting that the impact of the household 
environment has become weaker as living standards have increased. The Boyd Orr cohort 
used in this paper has the advantage of observing children in much poorer conditions 
twenty years earlier. More important still, it provides data on a number of children in 
each family, making it possible to distinguish between within- and between-family 
effects.     
Previous analysis by epidemiologists of the Boyd Orr cohort suggests that 
demographic and economic factors were important influences on the heights of these 
children (Gunnell et al., 1998a; Martin et al., 2002). One of these found that height was 
negatively associated with the number of children in the household but there was no 
consistent relationship between height and birth order. Other influences included the 
household’s per capita expenditure on food and the degree of crowding in the dwelling. 
Interestingly, these effects were found to be most important for leg length rather than 
trunk length, especially for younger children (Gunnell et al., 1998a). These studies 
include a wide array of explanatory variables but do not distinguish between direct and 
indirect effects, and they do not account for potential endogeneity.  
An important issue is whether socio-economic effects on height observed during 
childhood persist into adulthood or whether retarded growth during childhood may be 
compensated by catch-up growth in later adolescence. Previous studies of the Boyd Orr 
cohort indicate that there is a strong correlation between measures such as height and leg 
length observed during childhood and the same measures observed in adulthood (Gunnell 
et al., 2000). However, these correlations are likely to capture genetic influences as well 
as the ongoing effects of childhood conditions. Other analyses suggest that height during 
childhood acts as a marker for the incidence of diseases such as cancer that occur later the 
life-course as well as for overall mortality (Gunnell et al., 1998b, 1998c). One recent 
study draws a direct link between income and housing conditions during childhood and 
the longevity of members of the Boyd Orr cohort, one third of whom are now deceased. 
(Frijters et al., 2007).  
 
 5
Birth Order, Family Size and Income  
 The effects of birth order, family size and income (or wealth) can be captured in a 
simple model, which provides an underpinning for the empirical investigation below. The 
total amount of resources devoted to children in family j with Nj children is Zj. 
           (1)  ∑
=
=
j
j
N
i
ijj zZ
1
where zij is the amount of resources, including expenditures and parental time, devoted to 
a child with birth order i in family j. Thus the mean of resources per child in the family is: 
j
j
j
N
Z
z =           (2) 
The ‘quality’ of child ij, qij, is a linear function of resources per child and the number of 
children. 
ijjijij euNzq +++= )α(β         (3) 
where uj and eij are family and child-specific random components, and ∑ .  β > 0 
captures the effect of resource scarcity. If there are economies of scale then a given 
amount of resources per child produces higher quality the more children there are. If α > 
0 there are economies of scale and if α < 0 there are diseconomies of scale in the 
production of child quality. If Z
−
=
jN
i
ije
1
0
j (and thus jz ) is defined only as purchased inputs (such 
as food and clothing) then the parameter α could also reflect the scarcity of parental time 
or other inputs not directly purchased and would more likely be negative. eij is an 
exogenous child-specific component. Thus the average quality of children in family j, 
jq , is: 
 jjjj uNzq ++= )α(β         (4) 
Children in the family may receive different amounts of resources depending on 
their birth order. There are a number of alternative hypotheses in the literature to explain 
empirical birth order effects. One is simply that parents favour some children (typically 
the earlier born) over others. Another hypothesis is that those with low birth orders have 
more resources and undivided parental time devoted to them in the important early years. 
A third possibility is that younger mothers are fitter or more energetic, which would 
 6
favour the earlier born although if they gain experience from nurturing children then this 
would favour the later born. We express the resources devoted to child ij as a linear 
function of birth order:  
)
2
1
(γ
+−+= jjjij
N
izz         (5) 
where ij is the individual child’s birth order and (N j+ 1)/2 is the average birth order of 
children in the family. If γ < 0, children higher than the middle of the birth order get less 
than average resources. Using (3) and (5), the quality of child i can be written as: 
iji
j
jjjij eu
N
iNzq +++−++= )
2
1
(βγβαβ       (6) 
According to (6) child quality can be divided into three components. The first is 
the average resource per child, which may be assumed to depend on the family’s total 
resources and it willingness to allocate them to children. The second represents scale 
economies in the production of child quality. And the third term is a birth order effect 
that represents the allocation of resources to children of different parities. Notice that the 
birth order effect can be estimated by using family fixed effects so that all family effects 
are absorbed including average birth order, (Nj + 1)/2. Note also that birth order effects 
will only be observed if there is resource scarcity, β > 0, and the there is some inequality 
in the resource allocation across children, γ ≠ 0.  
A more troublesome issue is to identify the other parameters, which must be 
estimated by looking across families. This can be done by estimating (4), but much of the 
interest lies in estimating the isocost relationship between q  and N for a given Z. This is 
illustrated in Figure 1 where S1 is an isocost curve and U1 is an indifference curve, 
leading to the utility maximising outcomes 1q and N1 at point A. The key problem is that 
we cannot observe Z. Thus, while one household chooses point A, another might locate at 
B on isocost curve S2, either because it has more income or because it chooses to devote 
more to children. In that case, estimating across the households could produce a positive 
relationship between q  and N. Alternatively it might locate at C, in which case 
 7
comparing A and C would produce a negative relationship. Neither would estimate the 
slope of S1 and therefore the ‘true’ quality-quantity trade-off along the isocost curve.2
One solution to this problem that has appeared in the literature is to use the 
incidence of twins as an exogenous shock to family size, based on the assumption that 
subsequent fertility behaviour is not fully compensating. The advent of twins could shift 
the household along the original isocost curve, from A to point A’, and thus it would be 
an appropriate instrument. While the family could shift to a higher (or lower) isocost 
curve in response to the twin-birth shock, this is likely to be a second order effect. 
However there are some pitfalls in using twins as an instrument, which we discuss further 
below.  
Apart from the reduced form effect of family size, an important issue is how 
strongly child health is related to the family’s income level and whether there are 
economies of scale. We explore this by estimating equation (4) above. We also examine 
whether family size has an effect on child health in addition to that working through per 
capita income. In addition, we attempt to dig further into the mechanisms involved by 
looking at the combined effects of food expenditure and housing conditions on the 
heights of children.    
 
Data: The Boyd Orr Cohort 
The Boyd Orr survey is one of the few surveys undertaken in interwar Britain for 
which the individual records survive and the only one that contains evidence on the 
heights and weights of children as well as other relevant details on income, family 
structure and housing conditions. The records from this study have been collected and 
supplemented with additional data from follow-up surveys by a team of medical 
researchers at the University of Bristol (Martin et al., 2005). The original survey included 
a total of 1343 households containing children under the age of 19. A selection of 
households with school-age children was surveyed in 16 towns and villages in England 
and Scotland in the years 1937-9. These were intended to be representative of urban and 
                                                 
2 In the context of the model set out above the slope of the isocost curve is 
N
qβ−αβ2 , which is negative 
provided that β > 0 and α is sufficiently small.  
 8
rural locations but the survey was confined to households with children and it was 
targeted to over-represent poor families.3 The survey recorded details of the demographic 
structure of each household together with details of income and housing conditions. It 
also recorded itemised details of expenditure and consumption of food during the survey 
week. Finally, the clinical part of the survey collected a variety of indicators of the 
anthropometric and health status of the children including height, leg length, weight, 
incidence of medical conditions and dental decay. The Bristol team conducted follow up 
surveys in 1997/8 and 2002/3 of those who could be traced, collecting details on their 
health and socio-economic status later in life. 
The two variables that are the focus of this study are height and body mass index 
(BMI)4. These were collected in the medical survey, which was conducted separately 
from the initial survey of the households. The medical survey did not cover all the 
households nor did it measure each child in the households that were included in the 
initial survey. As compared with the original sample, the medical survey under-represents 
infants, those aged 14 and over, and most important, those in certain locations.5 Here we 
focus on children aged 2 to 14, for whom measurement of both height and weight is 
available for a total 2946 children in 1131 households.6  
The heights of these children by age are plotted in Figure 2. The heights of boys 
and girls are very similar, increasing fairly linearly from about 85 cm at age 2 to 152 cm 
at age 14. These can be compared with Department of Health Data for England in 2002. 
As compared with current heights children in the Boyd Orr cohort were more that 6 cm 
shorter by the age of 8 and more than 9cm shorter at the age of 12. Figure 3 shows the 
same comparison for BMI, which follows a characteristics U-shaped pattern with a mean 
                                                 
3 The 16 locations are, in Scotland: Aberdeen, Kintore, Hopeman, Barthol Chapel, Methlick, Tarves, West 
Wemyss, Coaltown of Wemyss, Dundee and Edinburgh; and in England: Barrow-in-Furness, Liverpool, 
Yorkshire, Wisbech, Fulham and Bethnal Green. These locations are identified on a map in Martin et al. 
(2005), p. 743.  
4 BMI is weight in kilograms divided by height in metres squared.  
5 The survey report is somewhat vague on this point, commenting that “For various reasons all children in 
all surveyed families could not be examined although the attempt was made to include them all” (Rowett 
Institute, 1955, p. 50). One difficulty seems to have been arranging attendance at a school or clinic where 
measuring instruments could be used. But another seems to have been simply a matter of logistics: two of 
the original locations (Edinburgh and Kintore) are not represented at all in the clinical survey.    
6 According to the original survey report 3762 children were examined, and the records for most of these 
have been found. We exclude those under age 2 and over 14 because they are underrepresented and may be 
subject to selection bias, and also because the height measurements for the very young children are thought 
to be less reliable.  
 9
across all ages of just over 16. By the age of 14 the mean BMI in the Boyd Orr cohort 
was lower than that for contemporary children by 2.9 for boys and by 3.9 for girls.  
For the purposes of analysis, the heights of children are standardised by age and 
sex by calculating z-scores, which are defined as: 
populationreferenceofdeviationdardtans
)valuereferencemedian()valueobserved(scorez −=−  
where reference values have been calibrated on the population under study. Similarly 
BMI values are converted into z-scores. Thus these variables have a mean approximately 
equal to zero and standard deviations approximately equal to one. Among the children in 
this sample 1.7 percent of children have z-scores for height of less than two and 2.4 
percent have z-scores for BMI of less than two.  
Some of the other characteristics of those who were measured are reported in 
Table 1, which lists the means across individuals and the means across households. The 
average age of the children is 7 years and 11 months and a little over half are female. The 
average child has a birth order of 2.78 and comes from a family with 4.56 children 
whereas the average family has 3.74 children. Weekly family income per capita is 
available only as categorical variable, with four categories: less than 10 shillings per 
week, 10-15 shillings, 15-20 shillings and greater than 20 shillings. The lowest category 
was considered as living in poverty by the standards of the time. Boyd Orr (1936, p. 49) 
identified those living with incomes of less than 10 shillings per week as having a food 
intake that was deficient in almost every constituent while those in the next income 
bracket suffered deficiencies mainly in certain minerals and vitamins.  As Table 1 shows 
71.6 percent of children and 59.8 percent of families are poor on this criterion. Similarly, 
per capita expenditure on food is grouped into four categories: less than 5 shillings, 5-7 
shillings, 7-9 shillings and greater than 9 shillings. 54.8 percent of the children and 43.6 
percent of households were below the five-shilling threshold.  
To put some of these figures into perspective, these families are a little larger and 
substantially poorer than the average for 1930s Britain, even if we look only at 
households with children. They average 5.9 persons per household as compared with 4.9 
for families with children in England and Wales in 1931 (Nixon, 1935, p. 150). In his 
 10
survey of York (a fairly typical town) in 1936, Rowntree (1941, pp. 42, 144-149) found 
that 37 percent of working class households and 43 percent of children under 14 were in 
poverty—a much lower percentage than in the Boyd Orr survey.7 From a present-day 
perspective, the poverty line of 10 shillings a week is roughly equivalent to 2.4 US 
dollars per day in 2006. This can be compared with the World Bank’s poverty lines for 
Third World countries of about 3 dollars per day for moderate poverty and about 1.5 
dollars per day for extreme poverty. 
The survey also collected a limited amount of information on living conditions in 
the household. One is the number of persons per room. 42 percent of these households 
were living in overcrowded conditions, on the widely used criterion of more than two 
persons per room. The investigators also gave an assessment of the general level of 
cleanliness of the dwelling, ranking a third of them as good or excellent and the 
remainder moderate or poor. Only 37 percent of the dwellings possessed a flush toilet 
inside with the remainder being non-flush and/or outside. Finally, nearly three-quarters of 
dwellings were assessed as having good or excellent ventilation, with the rest designated 
as moderate or poor. This probably reflects the overall quality of the dwelling, something 
that will be discussed further below.   
 
Birth Order Effects 
We begin by looking at the effects of birth order. As previously noted a number of 
studies have found that outcomes for children are determined by where the child falls in 
the family birth order. The most common finding is that children with higher birth orders 
have less favourable outcomes. Clearly, birth order is correlated with the number of 
children in the household and it is therefore difficult to identify the separate effects of 
birth order and family size in cases where only one child is sampled in each family. The 
Boyd Orr data is particularly useful in this respect, not only because we observe a number 
of children in each family, but also because it contains a wide range of birth orders 
running from first- to eleventh-born. By including family fixed effects, all effects 
                                                 
7 The poverty line used by Rowntree in 1936 was based on an equivalence scale but for a family of two 
adults and three children it was 43s 6d exclusive of rent. Rents averaged about 9s, and so the crude per-
capita poverty line would be 10s 6d.   
 11
common to the family, in particular the number of children and family income, are 
absorbed in the fixed effects. 
Table 2 presents characteristics of the children under study by birth order. Not 
surprisingly, the age at which the children are observed declines with birth order. More 
importantly, there is a distinct gradient in the height z-scores, running from +0.17 of a 
standard deviation for first-born children to –0.34 for those with a birth order of six and 
above. The same is not true of BMI, where the highest values are in the intermediate birth 
orders. Clearly, the gradient observed in the height z-scores could simply reflect a 
negative family size effect. 
Table 3 presents regressions with family fixed effects, dropping cases for which 
only one child was measured. The first column indicates that there is essentially no birth 
order effect within families in the absence of other controls. Thus the birth order gradient 
observed in Table 2 seems to be entirely due to family-level effects associated with the 
number of children.  The second regression adds other individual-specific controls. Being 
first-born or being female has essentially no effect. However, twins are shorter by more 
than half a standard deviation, equivalent to 3cm for an eight year old. The other key 
finding is the positive coefficient on date of birth. Given that the z-scores adjust for age 
this must be interpreted as a cohort effect, with later cohorts being taller than those born 
earlier. In the presence of cohort effects, birth order now has a negative and significant 
effect on height. For an eight year old, moving up the birth order by one reduces height 
by 0.61cm. Thus for children within the family there are two offsetting effects: a positive 
cohort effect and a negative birth order effect.  
The second and third columns of Table 3 use the same variables to explain the z-
score for BMI. Without any additional controls there is a positive effect, which probably 
reflects the widely observed fact that higher parity children also have higher birth 
weights. As the fourth column shows, twins have lower BMI consistent with their lower 
birth weights, but other regressors have little effect. Additional variables have the effect 
of increasing the coefficient on birth order although this is now only significant at the ten 
percent level. Overall, the evidence suggests that the birth order effect of height 
dominates that of weight on BMI. 
 12
The results for height z-scores were subjected to a number of robustness checks. 
There is no evidence of non-linearity in the birth order effects, as some hypotheses would 
suggest. A full set of birth order dummies added to the second equation in Table 3 proved 
to be jointly insignificant (F5, 1806 = 0.82); alternatively a squared birth order term was 
insignificant (t = 0.02). The interaction of birth order and sex was insignificant (t = 0.97), 
as was the interaction of poverty and birth order (t = 0.50). Thus birth order effects on 
height are significantly negative, provided that cohort effects are taken into account, and 
they do not seem to vary with birth order itself, with sex, or with socio-economic 
conditions.    
 
The Effect of Family Size.  
One of the central issues in the literature is the effect of the number of children in 
a family on their average outcomes. In order to measure the trade-off between the quality 
and the quantity of children we have to look across families, and this inherently raises 
issues of endogeneity. The bias will be negative if families who choose more children 
also choose lower average quality, for reasons not associated with the resource constraint. 
The impact of infant and child mortality, which reduces the number of children observed 
in the family, is also an issue. If those who are healthiest (for reasons other than their 
resource share) are more likely to survive then this selection effect leads to a negative 
bias. On the other hand, families that suffer from poor health generally (and possibly 
genetically) may have higher mortality and less healthy children than otherwise similar 
families, leading to a positive bias. Using country-level data, Bozzoli et al. (2007) find 
that the balance of these effects produces a ‘U’ shaped relationship between average 
height and infant mortality. With an infant mortality rate of about 70 per thousand, 
interwar Britain falls somewhere in the middle of this range, where these effects are 
roughly offsetting.8  
As noted previously, a popular methodology for dealing with endogeneity is to 
use the incidence of twin births as an exogenous shock to family size. However, the 
                                                 
8 Specifically they find that the selection effect dominates at very high levels of infant mortality, so that 
lower mortality reduces average height. In the lower mortality environment of post-war Europe, the 
‘scarring’ effect dominates so that lower mortality increases average height. From visual inspection the 
relationship between height and infant mortality is fairly flat in the range of mortality between 80 and 200 
per thousand (Bozzoli et al., 2007, Figure 6).   
 13
incidence across families of any twin birth is endogenous since it is a function of the 
number of births, and hence of family size, and so the literature typically uses twin births 
at a given parity. Here we use twins at last birth (rather than at first birth) for three 
reasons. One is that with the relatively large family sizes in this dataset last birth will 
have a greater influence on family size than births at lower parities. Second, and perhaps 
related, there are more twin last births than first births, which is an important 
consideration given that twin birth is a rare event. Third, since the birth of twins might 
have a direct effect on higher parity children (and not just an effect working through 
family size), this ensures that we focus on those with lower parities than the twins that are 
used to derive the instrument. 
 Table 4 presents estimates for the effects of the number of children on height 
using the family as the unit of observation. This means that the height on the left hand 
side is the average z-score of measured children in each family, excluding twins, and thus 
eliminating the twins that are used to create the instrument.9 We also include the average 
date of birth to capture the cohort effect, but we exclude birth order since, as noted 
earlier, average birth order is simply a linear function of the number of children, which is 
therefore a size effect. The ordinary least squares coefficient in the first column on the 
number of children is negative and highly significant with a coefficient of –0.13. The 
instrumental variables coefficient in the second column, using twins as the only 
instrument, is more negative at –0.23. Thus the OLS coefficient appears to be an 
underestimate of the true (negative) effect, although the test for endogeneity is not 
significant.10 The IV coefficient in the second column implies that adding one child to the 
family reduces height at age eight by 1.2cm.  
It is worth examining the combined effect of family size and birth order across 
different children. If dilution of resources is a key determinant of height then height 
should decline with both birth order and family size. Thus, for the first child in the family 
the (negative) family size effect of adding one more child should exceed the (positive) 
                                                 
9 Note that because average height is not calculated over all the children in each family this measure could 
be biased if high or low birth order children were underrepresented. Comparing the average birth order by 
family from Table 1 (2.35) with that which would be predicted from average the number of children ((3.74 
+ 1)/2 = 2.37) indicates that this is not a serious concern.    
10 Although the incidence of twins is low this variable passes the weak instrument test, with an F-statistic 
for the first stage regression of 20.2.  
 14
effect of increasing the gap between the first child’s birth order and the mean birth order. 
These effects are plotted in Figure 4, based on the coefficients in Col. 2 of Table 3 and 
Col. 2 of Table 4. The predicted values are plotted as deviations from the predicted height 
of the third child in a five-child family (for which the value is set to zero). Relative to this 
benchmark, an only child is taller by 0.92 of a standard deviation while the first child in a 
nine-child family is shorter by 0.50 of a standard deviation. The total family size effect 
between first children in one- and nine-child families equates to as much as 12cm at age 
14.  Thus adding more children has a strong negative effect on the heights of the 
preceding children.  The birth order effects are slightly smaller, with a gap at age 14 
between the first and ninth child of 0.97 of a standard deviation or about 7cm.   
 For what follows below it is also worth exploring estimates with additional 
instruments. The first is a set of 14 location dummies. The correlation between fertility 
and locality is quite strong and there is a historical literature that points to distinct 
regional differences in fertility. For 1911 and earlier Garrett et al. (2001) find distinct 
differences in completed family size associated with urban and rural settings and with the 
industrial character of the locality. They argue that this reflects differences in spatial 
evolution of social norms.11 These neighbourhood effects are useful as instruments 
because they abstract from family-level heterogeneity. The second is a set of dummies for 
social class (6 categories based on occupation), which the historical literature also 
identifies as a key determinant of family size.12 Social class is very strongly correlated 
with income, but because it is less subject to short-term shocks, it may be thought of as 
closer to permanent income, which would be more appropriate as a determinant of long-
term health status than would be the case for current income.    
                                                 
11 Garrett et al. comment that “Individuals did not necessarily have to talk to one another about fertility per 
se in order to reflect upon how to behave with regards to family size: by observation of their neighbours in 
myriad daily interactions in public places such as the street, the church and the workplace people realised 
that smaller families had advantages, or conversely, that large families were becoming an object of pity. 
Each couple would have conceptualised these advantages in their own terms: some may have understood 
that fewer children meant more money to spend per member of the household; others might have realised 
the dividends to be gained in terms of health; or perhaps they simply came to recognise that large families 
were something, which, somehow, the respected and the respectable in their community deemed it prudent 
to avoid” (2001, p. 289).  For an account of household decisions on fertility in the interwar period based on 
oral history, see Gittins  (1982).  
12 See for example the study of occupation and fertility in1889/90 by Haines (1979). More recent studies of 
the late nineteenth century fertility decline have stressed that the relationship between occupation and 
fertility is only imperfectly captured by the broad aggregation into social classes and that a number of other 
influences (such as locality) are equally important correlates of fertility (Szreter, 1996; Garrett et al., 2001) 
 15
The third column of Table 4 uses twins and locality dummies as instruments and 
this substantially increases the significance of the family size coefficient as compared 
with using only twins. Interestingly, the coefficient is exactly the same as that using the 
twin instrument alone. The fourth column adds social class to the instrument set and this 
further raises the significance of the family size coefficient, which now becomes 
marginally more negative. The first stage estimates using this full instrument set are 
reported in the Appendix. We have to be careful about adding instruments that could in 
principle be correlated with the error term in the equation. Given the limited number of 
explanatory variables it is not surprising that the estimates in the third and fourth columns 
fail the overidentification test. But the important point is that adding additional 
instruments does not bias the coefficient back towards the OLS estimate. In these 
estimates date of birth is negative, in contrast with the result for birth order in Table 3, 
but it is insignificant in every case.  
 Table 5 repeats this exercise on the BMI index. The OLS estimate suggests that 
family size has no effect on BMI across families. Although the coefficient is always 
positive it is never significant with any of the instrument sets. This seems to be consistent 
with the results for birth order in the sense that that resource scarcity has stronger effects 
on height than on BMI. These findings suggest that the effects measured here are long-
term cumulative effects, which are usually associated with height, rather than short-term 
shocks to nutrition, which are more often associated with weight-for-height.  
 The estimates in Table 4 were subject to a number of robustness checks. One 
concern is that family size is measured with error because we only observe the number of 
children currently in the household and not completed family size. This is less of a 
concern for health status observed currently (which is influenced largely by conditions at 
the time) than for outcomes such as completed education that are observed much later. 
However, later children in older families may be living with fewer siblings than when 
they were in their infancy. In order to explore this we re-estimated the equations for 
heights in Table 4 using a sample of households in which there was at least one child 
under eight.  The coefficient estimates (‘t’ statistics) on the number of children for the 
same four equations in this reduced sample of 867 observations were, respectively: –
0.113 (6.26), –0.313 (1.74), –0.244 (5.14) and –0.304 (6.60).  
 16
 A further possible concern is that the family size effect might vary across the birth 
order. Estimating the OLS coefficient equivalent to the first column of Table 4 across 
individuals at a given birth order produced the following coefficients (‘t’ statistics): parity 
1: –0.134 (5.21); parity 2: –0.193 (8.08); parity 3: –0.123 (4.16); parity 4: –0.115 (2.57). 
Alternatively, using the full set of instruments (as in the forth column of Table 4) yielded 
the following results:  parity 1: –0.242 (4.57); parity 2: –0.305 (5.70); parity 3: –0.459 
(6.06); parity 4: –0.306 (3.23).  Thus the family size effect is negative and significant at 
each birth order for which we have a reasonable number of observations, with no strong 
trend across birth orders. 
 
The Effects of Per-capita Income and Family Size  
Studies of the effects of family size on the outcomes for children invoke resource 
scarcity within the family as the key mechanism. That raises the question of whether the 
family size effect works solely through spreading income more thinly or whether there 
are additional effects, possibly arising from economies or diseconomies of scale. Thus we 
estimate height outcomes for children by including per capita income in the household 
and the number of children as separate regressors. To the extent that the appropriate 
equivalence scale gives less than full weight to children, per capita income 
underestimates the weighted per capita income by a larger margin the more children there 
are. Hence we should pick up economies of scale that arise from larger family size 
through a positive family size coefficient. If we find that the family size effect is negative 
even in the presence of (non-equivalised) per capita income then that would strengthen 
the conclusion that there are negative family size effects independent of their effects 
through income per capita. As mentioned earlier, per capita income is reported in the 
original survey only as a categorical variable. Since per capita income is likely to be 
endogenous, we instrument this too, using the full instrument set. 
 Cross-household results for height and BMI z-scores are reported in Table 6. As 
before, the dependent variable is the household average, and the IV estimates presented 
here use the full set of instruments. The first column of Table 6 reports the OLS estimate 
for standardised heights. Here, the coefficient on per capita income is positive as 
expected and the coefficient on the number of children is negative. The IV estimate in the 
 17
second column produces a similar coefficient on per capita income and a more negative 
coefficient on the number of children, consistent with our earlier results. Thus it appears 
that family size has a direct negative effect on children’s heights in addition to its effect 
through per capita income. If there are economies of scale in the number of children (as is 
implied by most equivalence scales) then this coefficient underestimates the direct 
negative effect of family size.  
 The third and fourth columns of the table show that the z-score for BMI is not 
significantly affected by either income per capita or by the number of children. Thus 
family income and demographics affect the overall size of children as reflected in height 
but not their proportions as reflected in BMI. This is consistent with the results of other 
regressions (not reported here) showing that both leg length and trunk length are 
influenced by income per capita and the number of children.  
 
The Effects of Food Expenditure and Housing Conditions.  
 Socio-economic conditions are often thought to influence the heights of children 
through two key channels: food consumption and housing conditions. In order to explore 
this more fully, Table 7 explains variations in height across households by food 
expenditure per capita and crowding. As with income, food expenditure is available only 
as a categorical variable in the original survey data, while the measure of crowding is the 
number of persons per room. The first column of Table 7 illustrates the effect of these 
variables across households, using the same instruments as in Table 6 (see Appendix 
Table for the first stage estimates) and dropping the insignificant birth date variable. Not 
surprisingly, per capita food expenditure has a positive coefficient that is consistent with 
the income effect observed in Table 6. Overcrowding has a significant negative effect as 
might be expected. The second column shows that when the number of children is added 
as a regressor (and also treated as endogenous) it is insignificant while the coefficient on 
the crowding variable remains significant. Thus it seems to be crowding rather than the 
number of children per se that affects the height of children.  
The last two columns of Table 7 include an additional variable that ranks the level 
of cleanliness in the household, where 1 = poor, 2 = fair/moderate and 3 = 
good/excellent. This variable is also instrumented. As the third column shows, it has an 
 18
important influence and in its presence the coefficient on persons per room becomes 
small and insignificant.  In the last column the presence of this variable weakens the 
effects of both per capita food expenditure and the number of children. This result 
supports the idea that health is influenced not only by food intake but also by the disease 
environment. It widely recognised that illnesses such as diarrhoea and respiratory 
infections that are common in childhood can arrest growth by limiting the absorptive 
functions of the digestive tract or by reducing the individual’s appetite (for a survey of 
these effects see Silventoinen, 2003).  Repeated infection may have a cumulative effect 
on height, particularly when food supply is limited. The effect of cleanliness is of course 
indirect, but lack of hygiene is likely to reflect the presence of pathogens and an 
environment conducive to the transmission of infections. The inclusion of cleanliness has 
a smaller effect on the coefficient on the number of children in the fourth column than it 
does on overcrowding in the third column.  
In order to explore this issue a little further Table 8 provides some evidence on 
the correlates of cleanliness. These are ordered probit regressions for the three values of 
cleanliness, and the results should not be interpreted as causal. The first column shows 
that cleanliness is inversely related to the degree of crowding, and the second column 
indicates that it is also positively associated with per capita income. It seems likely that 
the larger is the family and the lower is its income the more difficult it would have been 
to maintain high standards of cleanliness. The third column adds a variable on toilet 
facilities as an indicator of housing quality, where 1 = no flush toilet, 2 = flush toilet 
outside or shared, and 3 = flush toilet inside and not shared. As the third column of Table 
8 shows, this takes a positive coefficient with modest effects on the other variables.  
The final column of Table 8 adds a variable for the quality of ventilation: 1 = 
poor, 2 = fair/moderate, and 3 = good/excellent. This variable is highly significant and 
seriously undermines the significance of the other variables. It is doubtful that this 
captures only the effects of better air circulation. It seems much more likely that this 
variable represents housing quality more generally, distinguishing, for instance, between 
dark dingy tenements and conditions in more modern housing.13 Overall, the results 
                                                 
13 Other social surveys undertaken in the 1930s provide some insight into working class housing conditions 
and their relation to health. In his 1936 social survey of York, Rowntree classified housing quality into five 
 19
suggest that child health is determined through two main mechanisms. One is the food 
budget relative to the number of mouths to feed. The other is the size of the family 
relative to housing conditions, which influences the standard of hygiene and hence the 
degree of exposure to recurrent illness for the children in the family. This latter effect is 
captured by the degree of general cleanliness in the home, which may be mitigated or 
exacerbated by the quality of housing.           
 
Adult Heights and Family Size 
An important question is whether the effects of childhood conditions on health 
persisted into adulthood. The effects on stature might have been modified by a 
compensating growth spurt during the later teenage years, an effect that might also be 
conditioned by the income effect of entering the labour market. In order to examine this 
issue we use data from the follow-up survey of the members of the Boyd Orr cohort who 
could be traced in 1997/8. Of the 3182 who were traced, 1647 responded to a 
questionnaire that included questions on health and socio-economic status during the 
subsequent life-course (see Martin et al. 2005 for details of the follow-up survey). Here 
we focus on a question about the individual’s height at the age of 20.  
 The use of data from a retrospective survey raises issues of measurement and 
selection. Individuals were asked to recall their height at the age of 20 when they were in 
their mid-fifties to mid-seventies. While self reported heights are typically subject to an 
upward bias, extensive analysis of the adult heights reported by members of the Boyd Orr 
cohort suggest that measurement error does not invalidate the usefulness of these data.14 
                                                                                                                                                 
categories. Of the worst category (occupied by about 30 percent of the working class population he 
commented that: “Many of them should be demolished; the rest should be improved. At present they 
menace the health of the occupants (Rowntree, 1941, p. 246). Lack of light and poor ventilation was a 
characteristic of some tenements as well as the older back-to-back houses. Many others built in Victorian 
times had back additions or a narrow rear access that restricted light and ventilation (this style was largely 
discontinued after the first World War). These conditions were often combined with a damp environment 
(due to the absence of damp courses) and a crumbling interior fabric. The effects of these factors are well 
described in the New Survey of London Life and Labour, conducted in 1929-31: “Dilapidated woodwork, 
plaster and wallpaper, if less serious than structural faults, are also more general. Few except the most 
modern working class dwellings are entirely from these defects. They are responsible for much dirt and 
discomfort and for the depressing atmosphere of squalor associated with so many working class homes. 
Their most serious effect, however, is that they harbour vermin of all sorts and especially bugs. ….[which] 
are a grave menace to comfort, health and peace of mind” (Llewellyn Smith (ed.) 1934, p. 188).  
14 Gunnell et al. (2000) conducted clinical examinations of 138 of those who responded to the 
questionnaire. They found that self-reported current height exceeded measured height by 2.4 cm for 59 men 
 20
It is important to note that of the 1339 survey members for whom we have self-reported 
height at age 20, only 866 were also measured as children. Among these the correlation 
coefficient between the z-score for adult height (adjusted only for sex) and the z-score for 
height during childhood is 0.67. Thus the mapping between childhood height and adult 
height is attenuated by some combination of measurement error and intervening 
conditions.     
 The characteristics during childhood of those who reported adult height are 
reported in Table 9. Not surprisingly they are somewhat younger than those represented 
in Table 1. They are less often from households with low income and poor housing 
conditions, but the differences between the means reported in Table 9 and in Table 1 are 
small.  This suggests that selection bias is unlikely to be important. In initial estimates for 
the effect of the number of children on adult height we estimated a selection model with a 
first stage probit for inclusion in the sample. Since the inverse Mills ratio never proved 
significant in the second stage regression for height we concluded that selection bias is 
not important. 
 Table 10 reports a set of IV regressions comparable to some of those in Tables 4, 
7 and 8 using the z-score for adult height as the dependent variable and using the full set 
of instruments discussed earlier.  The first equation illustrates that family size influences 
adult height and with a coefficient about two-thirds the size of that reported in the last 
column of Table 4. When per capita income is added in the second column the separate 
family size effect falls to a value similar to that in Table 6. However, the coefficient on 
per capita income is smaller and it is now significant only at the 10 percent level. When 
food expenditure per capita is included instead of income as in the third column the 
coefficient is small and insignificant. This seems to reflect the fact that, with fewer 
observations and with a less accurate measure of height, it is harder to distinguish the 
separate effects of income and family size. Using per capita income alone produces a 
coefficient of 0.240 (‘z’ = 4.9) while per capita expenditure alone produces a coefficient 
of 0.218 (‘z’ = 4.4).  
                                                                                                                                                 
and by 2.1 cm for 79 women. However, the correlation coefficient between measured and self-reported 
height was 0.94 for men and 0.88 for women.  
 21
 The last column of Table 10 introduces the index of cleanliness, which was found 
to be important for the health of children. The coefficient is smaller than that in the last 
column of Table 7 and it is not significant. Thus while the negative effect of family size 
seems to persist into adulthood the other effects are weaker when estimated in 
combination. Although the effects are less precisely estimated for the Boyd Orr cohort as 
adults, overall the evidence suggests that some of the effects observed during childhood 
persisted into adulthood.   
 A similar exercise was undertaken for BMI at age 20, although we do not report 
the results in full. Of the 1298 cases for whom we have self-reported BMI at age 20, 841 
were also measured as children, and the correlation between the z-scores for adult BMI 
and childhood BMI is 0.36. Not surprisingly, this is much lower than the correlation 
between childhood and adult heights. As with BMI during childhood the effect of the 
number of children is insignificant (‘z’ = 0.4) when estimated alone, and both the number 
of children and family income are insignificant (‘z’ = 0.7 and 1.0) when estimated in 
combination. While these results are consistent with those obtained for childhood BMI, 
the degree of persistence is much lower and the likelihood of measurement error is 
probably greater.      
 
Conclusion 
This paper contributes to the debate on the determinants of child quality using a 
unique dataset from 1930s Britain. It focuses on child health, as reflected by standardised 
height and BMI, in a sample of relatively poor households. We find that birth order and 
the number of children both have strong negative effects on height but not on BMI. These 
results are consistent with an interpretation that stresses the consequences of resource 
dilution within and between households. The development literature often interprets 
height as reflecting enduring deprivation (as it is cumulative) while BMI is typically 
associated with short-run privations. On that interpretation, the effects measured here 
capture the longer-term effects, which are likely to have prevailed throughout the 
childhood of those in the survey.  
A question less often posed is whether there is a negative family size beyond that 
of simply diluting family income per capita, and if so, what mechanisms it represents. 
 22
Our answer to the first question is that the number of children does have an independent 
negative effect and one that appears to be associated with the degree of crowding within 
the household. Our answer to the second question is suggestive rather than definitive. We 
find that the degree of cleanliness is important, a variable that is likely to be associated 
the standard of hygiene and thus with the disease environment within the household. This 
in turn is negatively associated with the degree of crowding in the household and 
positively with income per capita. Better quality housing seems to reduce the effect of 
crowding on height, presumably through its effects on hygiene. Thus the two key 
channels though which the number of children in a family status affects the health of 
children is directly through the reduction on food intake and more indirectly though the 
effect of crowding via the level of hygiene on the incidence of disease.  
Finally, there is evidence that these effects observed for children in the 1930s 
persisted into adulthood. Although our evidence here is less precise, it appears that 
poverty family size and housing conditions influenced the height and the health of the 
generation of those who were prime-age adults in the early postwar period.  These 
findings are consistent with other evidence showing that childhood height is a marker for 
bio-physiological processes that can affect future health. Reduced height is associated 
with increased risk of heart disease and stroke, the major causes of death in this cohort.   
 
 
 23
References 
 
Becker, G. S. and Lewis, H. G. (1973), “On the Interaction between the Quantity and  
Quality of Children,” Journal of Political Economy, 81, pp. S279-S288.  
Becker, G. S. and Tomes, N. (1976), Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of  
Children,” Journal of Political Economy, 84, pp. S143-S162.  
Behrman, J, (1988), Nutrition, Health, Birth Order and Seasonality: Intrahousehold  
 Allocation Among Children in Rural India,” Journal of Development Economics,  
28, pp. 43-62. 
Black, S. E., Devereaux, P. J. and Salvanes, (2005), “The More the Merrier? The Effect  
Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education,” (2005), Quarterly Journal  
of Economics, 120, pp. 669-700.  
Booth, A. L. and Kee, H. J. (2007), “Birth Order Matters: The Effect of Family Size and  
Birth Order on Educational Attainment,” Revised version of  IZA Discussion  
Paper 1713. 
Boyd Orr, J. (1936), Food Health and Income: A Survey of Adequacy of Diet in Relation  
to Income, London: Macmillan.  
Bozzoli, C., Deaton, A. S. and Quintana-Domeque (2007), “Child Mortality, Income and  
Adult Height,” NBER Working Paper 12966, Boston: NBER.  
Ejrnæs, M. and Pörtner, (2004) “Birth Order and the Intrahousehold Allocation of Time  
and Education,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, pp. 1008-1019. 
Fogelman, K. R. (1975), “Developmental Correlates of Family Size,” British Journal of  
Social Work, 5, pp. 43-57.  
Frijters, P., Shields, M. A., Hatton, T. J. and Martin, R. M. (2007), “Childhood Economic  
Conditions and Length of Life: Evidence from the UK Boyd Orr Cohort, 1937– 
2005,” IZA Discussion Paper 3042: Bonn: IZA 
Garrett, E, Reid, A., Schürer, K. and Szreter, S. (2001), Changing Family Size in England  
and Wales: Place, Class and Demography, 1891, 1911. Cambridge: Cambridge  
University Press. 
Gittins, D. (1982), Fair Sex: Family Size and Structure, 1910-39, London: Hutchinson.  
Glick, P. J., Marini, A. and Sahn, E. (2006), “Estimating the Consequences of  
Unintended Fertility for Child Health and Education in Romania: An Analysis  
using Twins Data,” Cornell University: unpublished.  
Goldstein, H. (1971), Factors Influencing the Height of Seven Year Old Children: Results  
from The National Child Development Study, Human Biology, 43, pp. 92-111.  
Gunnell, D. J., Davey Smith, G., Frenkel, S. J. Kemp, M. and Peters, T. J. (1998a),  
“Socio-economic and Dietary Influences on Leg Length and Trunk Length in  
Childhood: A Reanalysis of the Carnegie (Boyd Orr) Survey of Diet and Health in  
Prewar Britain,” Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 12, pp. 96-113.   
Gunnell, D., Davey Smith, G., Holly, J. M. P. and Frankel, S. (1998b), “Leg Length and  
Risk of Cancer in the Boyd Orr Cohort,” British Medical Journal, 317, pp.  
1350-1.  
Gunnell, D., Davey Smith, G., Frankel, S., Nanchahal, K., Braddon, F. E., Pemberton, J.  
and Peters, T. J. (1998c), “Childhood Leg Length and Adult Mortality: Follow up  
of the Carnegie (Boyd Orr) Survey of Diet and Health in Pre-War Britain,”  
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 52, pp. 142-152. 
 24
Gunnell, D., Berney, L., Holland, P., Maynard, M., Blane, D., Frankel, S., and Davey  
Smith, G. (2000), “How Accurately are Height, Weight and Leg Length Reported  
by the Elderly, and How Closely are they Related to Measurements Recorded in  
Childhood?” International Journal of Epidemiology, 29, pp. 456-464.  
Haines, M. R. (1979), Fertility and Occupation: Population Patterns in Industrialization,  
New York: Academic Press. 
Hanusheck, E. (1992), “The Trade-off between Child Quality and Quantity,” Journal of  
Political Economy, 100, pp. 894-117. 
Horton, S. (1988), “Birth Order and Child Nutritional Status: Evidence from the  
Philippines,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 36, pp. 341-354.   
Lewellyn Smith, H (ed.) (1934), The New Survey of London Life and Labour, Vol. VI,  
London: Longmans Green.  
Li, L. and Power, C. (2004), Influences on Childhood Height: Comparing Two  
Generations in the 1958 British Birth Cohort,” International Journal of  
Epidemiology, 33, pp. 1320-1328.   
Martin, R. M. (2002) Association Between Breastfeeding and Growth: The Boyd Orr  
Cohort Study,” Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and Neonatal Edition, 
(2002),” 87, pp. F193-F201.   
Martin, R. M., Gunnell, D., Pemberton, J., Frankel, S. and Davey Smith, G. (2005),  
“Cohort Profile: The Boyd Orr Cohort - An Historical Cohort Study Based on the  
65 Year Follow-up of the Carnegie Survey of Diet and Health (1937-39),” 
International Journal of Epidemiology, 34, pp. 742-749.  
Nixon, J. W. (1935), “The Size, Constitution and Housing Standards of the Family in  
 England and Wales, 1911 to 1931,” Review of the International Statistical  
Institute, 3, pp. 142-162.  
Rosenzweig, M. R. and Wolpin, K. I. (1980), “Testing the Quantity-Quality Fertility  
Model: The Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment,” Econometrica, 48, pp. 222- 
240. 
Rosenzweig, M. R. and Zhang, (2006), “Do Population Policies Induce more Human  
Capital Investment? Twins, Birthweight and China’s ‘One Child’ Policy,” Bonn:  
IZA Discussion Paper 2082.    
Rowett Institute (1955), Family Diet and Health in Pre-War Britain: A Dietary and  
Clinical Survey, Dunfermline: Carnegie U. K. Trust.  
Rowntree, B. S. (1941), Poverty and Progress: A Second Social Survey of York, London:  
Longmans Green.  
Silventionen, K. (2003), “Determinants of Variation in Adult Body Height,” Journal of  
Biosocial Science, 35, pp. 263-285. 
Szreter, S. (1996),  Fertility, Class and Gender In Britain, 1860-1940, Cambridge:  
Cambridge University Press.  
Thomas, D. (1994), “Like Father like Son; like Mother like Daughter: Parental Resources  
and Child Height,” Journal of Human Resources, 29, pp. 950-988.  
Wadsworth, M. E. J. (1991), Childhood, History and Adult Life, Oxford: Clarendon  
Press. 
 25
Table 1 
Characteristics of Children who were Measured in the Boyd Orr Survey 
 
 By individual By Household 
No of cases 2946 1131
Individual characteristics 
Average age  7.92 7.85
Average birth order 2.78 2.35
Percent female 52.7 53.9
Household characteristics 
Number of children in family 4.56 3.74
Family size 6.75 5.96
Family income per capita < 10s 71.56 59.8
Food expenditure per capita < 5s 54.75 43.50
Persons per room > 2 43.76 42.01
Clean house 32.26 33.11
Flush toilet inside 35.40 37.00
Good ventilation  70.56 73.00
 
Note: due to missing data some of the means are calculated on a smaller number of observations as follows 
(individuals, households): income per capita (2911, 1112), persons per room (2605, 984), clean house 
(2734, 1045), flush toilet (2099, 786) good ventilation (2707, 1037).  
 
 
Table 2 
Children Measured in the Boyd Orr Survey by Birth Order 
 
Birth Order No of 
Children 
Average age Percent 
female 
Height 
z-score 
BMI index 
z-score 
1 760 9.40 54.9 0.167 -0.044
2 761 8.61 50.0 0.084 0.013
3 595 7.72 53.9 -0.094 0.006
4 390 6.68 51.2 -0.066 0.093
5 229 6.10 58.2 -0.167 0.078
6+ 211 4.89 48.4 -0.340 -0.011
All 2946 7.92 52.8 -0.000 0.011
 
 26
Table 3 
Effect of Birth Order on Height and BMI 
(family fixed effects regression) 
 
 Height z-score BMI index z-score 
Constant -0.042 -1.203 -0.097 0.374
 (0.34) (3.69) (2.16) (0.90)
Birth order -0.004 -0.105 0.036 0.074
 (0.31) (3.24) (2.47) (1.94)
First born 0.033  -0.019
 (0.73)  (0.34)
Sex (F = 1) 0.003  0.029
 (0.09)  (0.76)
Twin -0.535  -0.344
 (4.07)  (2.22)
Date of birth (years) 0.048  -0.018
 (3.69)  (1.17)
R2 (within) 0.000 0.015 0.003 0.007
No. children 2650 2650 2650 2650
No. families 835 835 835 835
Note: ‘t’ statistics in parentheses. 
 
Table 4 
Effect of Family Size on Height 
(Regression on family average height z-score, excluding twins) 
 
 OLS IV IV IV 
Constant 0.972 1.375 1.379 1.626
 (3.32) (2.52) (3.98) (4.65)
No of children -0.133 -0.231 -0.232 -0.273
 (9.61) (2.08) (5.07) (7.62)
Date of birth (years) -0.011 -0.012 -0.012 -0.013
 (1.19) (1.26) (1.28) (1.30)
Instruments  
Twin at last birth Yes Yes Yes
Location dummies No Yes Yes
Social class dummies No No Yes
R2  0.081 0.059 0.058 0.000
Endogeneity  χ2(2) = 0.80 χ2(2) = 5.23 χ2(2) = 20.44 
(p-value) (0.67) (0.07) (0.00)
Overidentification χ2(13) = 45.94 χ2(18) = 56.16
(p-value) (0.00) (0.00)
No. families 1121 1121 1121 1121
Note: ‘t’ statistics in parentheses computed from robust standard errors.  
 
 
 27
Table 5 
Effect of Family Size on Body Mass Index 
(Regression on family average BMI z-score, excluding twins) 
 
 OLS IV IV IV 
Constant 0.623 -0.123 0.446 0.561
 (2.00) (0.19) (1.25) (1.63)
No of children 0.010 0.192 0.053 0.025
 (0.79) (1.40) (1.23) (0.72)
Date of birth (years) -0.021 -0.019 -0.021 -0.021
 (2.06) (1.76) (2.01) (2.05)
Instruments  
Twin at last birth Yes Yes Yes
Location dummies No Yes Yes
Social class dummies No No Yes
R2  0.005 0.000 0.000 0.005
Endogeneity  χ2(2) = 1.82 χ2(2) = 1.15 χ2(2) = 0.15 
(p-value) (0.40) (0.56) (0.93)
Overidentification χ2(13) = 39.77 χ2(18) = 44.57
(p-value) (0.00) (0.00)
No. families 1121 1121 1121 1121
Note: ‘t’ statistics in parentheses computed from robust standard errors. 
 
Table 6 
 
Effect of Income and Family Size on Height and BMI 
(Regression on family average height and BMI z-scores, excluding twins) 
 
 Height z-score BMI index z-score 
 OLS IV OLS IV 
Constant -0.322 -0.054 0.452 0.330
 (0.98) (0.11) (1.33) (0.64)
Income per capita 0.265 0.275 0.035 0.035
 (8.41) (4.62) (1.08) (0.52)
No of children -0.071 -0.144 0.018 0.047
 (4.78) (2.80) (1.31) (0.95)
Date of birth (years) 0.009 0.009 -0.018 -0.018
 (0.96) (0.85) (1.76) (1.60)
R2  0.145 0.134 0.006 0.003
Endogeneity  χ2(3) = 7.54  χ2(2) = 0.86 
(p-value) (0.06)  (0.83)
Overidentification χ2(17) = 46.34  χ2(18) = 42.46
(p-value) (0.00)  (0.00)
No. Families 1102 1102 1102 1102
Note: ‘t’ statistics in parentheses computed from robust standard errors. 
 28
Table 7 
Effects of Food Expenditure and Housing Conditions on Height 
(IV regression on family average height z-score, excluding twins) 
 
 Height z-scores 
Constant -0.167 0.207 -1.957 -1.453
 (0.88) (0.49) (4.16) (3.04)
Food expenditure 0.278 0.217 0.285 0.150
per capita (4.69) (2.66) (4.51) (1.67)
Overcrowding -0.130 -0.110 -0.028 
(persons per room) (2.58) (2.05) (0.46) 
No of children -0.078  -0.126
 (0.96)  (1.70)
Cleanliness 0.698 0.771
 (4.34) (4.87)
R2  0.143 0.019 0.007 0.000
Endogeneity  χ2(2) = 2.14 χ2(3) = 4.35 χ2(3) = 16.35  χ2(3) = 20.26 
(p-value) (0.34) (0.22) (0.00) (0.83)
Overidentification χ2(17) = 44.72 χ2(16) = 43.97 χ2(16) = 23.28 χ2(18) = 42.46
(p-value) (0.00) (0.00) (0.11) (0.00)
No. Families 978 978 953 1037
Note: ‘z’ statistics in parentheses computed from robust standard errors. 
 
 
Table 8 
Effects of Income, Crowding and House Quality on Cleanliness 
 (Ordered probit regressions) 
 
 Cleanliness score 
Persons per room -0.238 -0.161 -0.183 0.016
 (5.33) (3.45) (3.38) (0.24)
Per capita income 0.239 0.193 0.146
 (5.05) (3.57) (2.44)
Flush toilet inside 0.126 0.064
 (1.92) (0.92)
Good ventilation  1.382
  (11.70)
Cut 1 -1.959 -1.446 -1.322 -2.025
Cut 2 0.008 0.546 0.665 0.702
Pseudo-R2  0.027 0.041 0.045 0.214
No of households 953 940 727 726
 
Note: ‘z’ statistics in parentheses computed from robust standard errors. 
 29
Table 9: 
Characteristics of Boyd Orr Cohort Members who reported Adult Height 
 
 By individual By Household 
No of cases 1339 762
Individual characteristics 
Average age  6.96 6.82
Average birth order 2.89 2.68
Percent female 54.52 53.89
Household characteristics 
Number of children in family 4.41 4.02
Family size 6.58 6.21
Family income per capita < 10s 67.22 62.15
Food expenditure per capita < 5s 50.86 46.46
Persons per room > 2 39.97 34.99
Clean house 33.36 33.10
Flush toilet inside 42.57 40.88
Good ventilation  73.63 73.14
 
Note: due to missing data some of the means are calculated on a smaller number of observations as follows 
(individuals, households): income per capita (1321, 753), persons per room (1156, 663), clean house (1247, 
707), flush toilet (935, 548) good ventilation (1240, 700).  
 
Table 10 
Effects of Family Size on Adult Height 
(IV regression on family average height z-score, excluding twins) 
 
 Height z-scores at age 20 
Constant 1.007 0.529 0.760 0.356
 (6.27) (1.75) (2.07) (0.65)
No. of children  -0.197 -0.130 -0.166 -0.194
 (5.00) (2.46) (2.74) (3.03)
Income per capita  0.124  
 (1.81)  
Expenditure per  0.059 -0.007
capita (0.77) (0.07)
Cleanliness  0.272
  (1.24)
R2  0.00 0.038 0.010 0.00
Endogeneity  χ2(2) = 10.36 χ2(3) = 3.47 χ2(3) = 5.82  χ2(3) = 6.71 
(p-value) (0.00) (0.08) (0.06) (0.08)
Overidentification χ2(21) = 24.06 χ2(16) = 23.61 χ2(16) = 23.96 χ2(18) = 22.07
(p-value) (0.39) (0.26) (0.24) (0.25)
No. Families 755 746 755 700
Note: ‘z’ statistics in parentheses computed from robust standard errors. 
 
 30
APPENDIX 
First Stage Estimates 
 
 Col 2 Table 6 first stage Col 1 Table 7 first stage 
 Income p. c.  No. children Food exp p. c.  Overcrowding 
Constant 4.418 5.365 2.176 2.535 
 (12.58) (8.25) (10.01) (8.96) 
Twins last birth -0.466 1.349 -0.380 0.664 
 (3.16) (4.37) (3.64) (2.75) 
Mean date of birth -0.301 -0.081   
 (2.90) (3.97)   
Social class II -0.948 0.928 -0.785 0.338 
 (7.59) (4.43) (5.55) (2.79) 
Social class III -1.366 1.161 -1.181 0.648 
 (10.65) (5.37) (8.65) (5.56) 
Social class IV -1.635 1.607 -1.305 0.799 
 (13.27) (6.96) (9.21) (6.46) 
Social class V -1.935 1.577 -1.629 0.933 
 (16.19) (7.10) (12.44) (7.32) 
Social class VI -1.434 0.879 -1.212 0.392 
 (9.36) (3.39) (7.55) (2.79) 
Barrow-in-Furness -0.406 -0.150 0.907 -1.340 
 (1.67) (0.39) (4.56) (4.92) 
Barthol Chapel -0.994 -1.354 1.197 -1.606 
 (3.71) (3.24) (4.45) (5.84) 
Bethnal Green -5.801 0.025 0.609 -0.873 
 (2.47) (0.07) (3.27) (3.23) 
Coaltown of Wemyss -0.183 -0.881 1.695 -1.298 
 (0.68) (2.02) (7.10) (4.47) 
Dundee -0.269 -0.261 0.906 0.079 
 (1.10) (0.67) (4.41) (0.25) 
Fulham 0.155 -0.785 1.208 -1.676 
 (0.59) (2.03) (4.89) (6.07) 
Hopeman -0.997 -0.297 0.739 -0.653 
 (3.77) (0.61) (3.19) (1.43) 
Liverpool -0.516 0.617 0.535 1.365 
 (2.11) (1.66) (2.70) (4.89) 
Methlick -0.485 -1.313 1.197 1.612 
 (1.57) (3.22) (4.51) (5.71) 
Tarves -0.843 -0.497 0.722 -1.432 
 (3.40) (1.37) (3.49) (5.26) 
West Wemyss -0.297 -0.521 1.636 -0.767 
 (1.17) (1.24) (7.26) (2.56) 
Wisbech -0.463 -0.737 1.072 -1.686 
 (1.97) (2.12) (5.49) (6.29) 
Yorkshire -0.416 -0.330 0.817 -1.671 
 (1.70) (0.86) (4.06) (6.19) 
R2  0.403 0.140 0.323 0.347 
F 39.07 10.93 27.73 24.33 
No of observations 1102 1102 978 978 
 
Note: ‘t’ statistics in parentheses.  
 
 
 31
Figure 1 
The Child Quality-Quantity Trade-off 
 
 
Average 
child 
quality 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
       1q  
 
S1 
A’ •
A 
N1                                                  No. of children 
•
•
•
S2 
B
C 
U1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 32
Figure 2
Height by Age, 1937-9 and 2002
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Age
C
en
tim
et
re
s
Boys, 1937-9
Girls, 1937-9
Boys, 2002
Girls, 2002
Source: 2002 data from: http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/PublishedSurvey/
HealthSurveyForEngland/Healthsurveyresults/DH_4001334 
 
ource: 2002 data from: http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/PublishedSurvey/
Figure 3
Body Mass Index by Age, 1937-9 and 2002
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Age
B
M
I I
nd
ex
Boys, 1937-9
Girls, 1937-9
Boys, 2002
Girls, 2002
S
HealthSurveyForEngland/Healthsurveyresults/DH_4001334 
 33
 Figure 4
Predicted Family Size and Birth Order Effects on Height z-score
(3rd child in 5 child family = 0)
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Birth Order
St
an
da
rd
 D
ev
ia
tio
ns
N = 1
N = 2
N = 3
N = 4
N = 5
N = 6
N = 7
N = 8
N = 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 34

