D
I
S
C
U
S
S
I
O
N
 
P
A
P
E
R
 
S
E
R
I
E
S
Forschungsinstitut 
zur Zukunft der Arbeit
Institute for the Study 
of Labor 
Wage Growth and Job Mobility in the Early Career: 
Testing a Statistical Discrimination Model of the 
Gender Wage Gap
IZA DP No. 6893
October 2012
Philippe Belley
Nathalie Havet
Guy Lacroix
 
Wage Growth and Job Mobility in the Early 
Career: Testing a Statistical Discrimination 
Model of the Gender Wage Gap 
 
 
Philippe Belley 
Kansas State University 
 
Nathalie Havet 
GATE Lyon-Saint-Etienne, Universit? de Lyon 
 
Guy Lacroix 
Universit? Laval, 
CIRP?E, CIRANO and IZA 
 
 
 
Discussion Paper No. 6893 
October 2012 
 
 
 
IZA 
 
P.O. Box 7240   
53072 Bonn   
Germany   
 
Phone: +49-228-3894-0  
Fax: +49-228-3894-180   
E-mail: iza@iza.org 
 
 
 
 
Any opinions expressed here are those of the author(s) and not those of IZA. Research published in 
this series may include views on policy, but the institute itself takes no institutional policy positions. 
The IZA research network is committed to the IZA Guiding Principles of Research Integrity. 
 
The Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) in Bonn is a local and virtual international research center 
and a place of communication between science, politics and business. IZA is an independent nonprofit 
organization supported by Deutsche Post Foundation. The center is associated with the University of 
Bonn and offers a stimulating research environment through its international network, workshops and 
conferences, data service, project support, research visits and doctoral program. IZA engages in (i) 
original and internationally competitive research in all fields of labor economics, (ii) development of 
policy concepts, and (iii) dissemination of research results and concepts to the interested public.  
 
IZA Discussion Papers often represent preliminary work and are circulated to encourage discussion. 
Citation of such a paper should account for its provisional character. A revised version may be 
available directly from the author. 
IZA Discussion Paper No. 6893 
October 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Wage Growth and Job Mobility in the Early Career: 
Testing a Statistical Discrimination Model of the Gender Wage Gap 
 
The paper focuses on the early career patterns of young male and female workers. It 
investigates potential dynamic links between statistical discrimination, mobility, tenure and 
wage profiles. The model assumes that it is more costly for an employer to assess female 
workers' productivity and that the noise/signal ratio tapers off more rapidly for male workers. 
These two assumptions yield numerous theoretical predictions pertaining to gender wage 
gaps. These predictions are tested using data from the 1979 cohort of the National 
Longitudinal Survey of Youth. As predicted by our statistical discrimination model, we find 
that men and women have the same wage at the start of their career, but that female wages 
grow at a slower rate, creating a gender wage gap. Also consistent with our model, we find 
that mean wages are higher for workers who keep their job, while wage growth is stronger for 
workers who change job. 
 
 
JEL Classification: J16, J71, J41 
  
Keywords: gender wage gap, job transitions, tenure, returns to mobility, experience 
 
 
Corresponding author: 
 
Guy Lacroix 
Department of Economics 
Pavillon de S?ve 
Universit? Laval 
Qu?bec (Qu?bec) 
Canada G1K 7P4 
E-mail: Guy.Lacroix@ecn.ulaval.ca 
 
1 Introduction
Economic analysis has made numerous contributions to our understanding of the causes of occupa-
tional segregation and the existence of earnings disparities between men and women on the labor
market.1 In particular, several theories of discrimination have attempted to explain why two groups
with identical average productivity are paid different average wages. They have attributed differences
to either employers? prejudices, i.e. taste discrimination [Becker (1957)], or imperfect information, i.e.
statistical discrimination [Phelps (1972); Arrow (1973)]. However, all of these theories in their earliest
and simplest version are not supported by empirical evidence. Models built on taste discrimination
predict the elimination of the male/female differential in the long run, whereas their persistency has
been observed for decades in most OECD countries. Models based on statistical discrimination have
proved deceptive since they were unable to generate a gender/racial gap in mean wages.
Consequently, second generation models have been developed to go beyond the strict opposition
between discrimination and productivity differentials. For example, recent models of taste discrimina-
tion integrate henceforth the dynamic of job-search costs [Flabbi (2010); Bowlus and Eckstein (2002);
Rosen (2003); Black (1995); Sattinger (1996); Sasaki (1999); Sulis (2011)] and obtain more interest-
ing conclusions in the long term. Nevertheless, these models are always little helpful in understanding
gender discrimination as they fail to explain the root of the prejudices. In contrast to taste-based
theories of discrimination, statistical discrimination theories derive group inequality without assuming
gender animus or preference bias against members of a targeted group. Models of statistical discrim-
ination are more appealing because they suggest gender discrimination may be a rational response by
firms to imperfect information on individual productivity.
While all models of statistical discrimination share that feature, there exist important differences
1For a literature review, see Cain (1986) and, more recently, Altonji and Blank (1999) and Havet
(2004) and for statistical discrimination, see Fang and Moro (2011).
1
which suggest different explanations for group inequality. Two principal paths in this literature have
been followed. The first one, based on Arrow (1973), examines how asymmetric beliefs (true or not)
about different groups can influence hiring decisions or wages. Recent models of this kind combine
dynamic job assignment models with human capital assumptions. They explain wage differentials as
well as promotions [Lazear and Rosen (1990); Barron et al. (1993)] and their long term persistency
[Coate and Loury (1993); Moro and Norman (2004); Moro (2003); Fryer (2007)].
The second path followed in the field of statistical discrimination originates directly from the
pioneer work of Phelps (1972). It is based on the notion that employers are unable to precisely
know the productivity of each employee insofar as the signals available to them (recruitment tests,
diplomas, etc.) are less reliable for women than for men. Recent work has thus extended Phelps?s
seminal contribution by introducing human capital investment decisions [Lundberg and Startz (1983);
Havet and Sofer (2008)] or by accounting for job matching [Rothschild and Stiglitz (1982); Oettinger
(1996)]. In both cases, it turns out wage gaps arise endogenously.
This paper focuses on the early career patterns of young male and female workers. In order to
achieve a better understanding of the overall gender wage gap, it seems to be of crucial importance to
understand the factors contributing to the gender differential in early-career wage growth. Indeed, we
empirically observe that the gender wage gap is fairly small at the entry into the labour market, but
after a few years a considerable gender wage gap emerges [Loprest (1992); Manning and Swaffield
(2008); Napari (2009); Del Bono and Vuri (2011)]. Consequently, investigating the determinants of
gender wage gap in the early career could help understand the growing male-female wage gap over
the course of the worker?s career. Moreover, focusing on career starts is particularly interesting since
some of the common explanations for gender wage gap are irrelevant at this stage. For example,
male and female workers differ fairly little in terms of career interruptions and thus gender wage gap
cannot be convincingly explained by gender differences in promotion opportunities (glass ceillings)
2
given the short durations of jobs and the small experience of young workers. By contrast, models of
job mobility, which point to the heterogeneity in the quality of employee-employer matches [Burdett
(1978); Jovanovic (1979)] could be relevant. There is evidence that mobility plays a less important
role in terms of wage growth for young women: not only are young women less likely to quit a job,
but they also seem to receive lower returns to mobility than young men [Simpson (1990); Light and
Ureta (1992); Loprest (1992)].
Therefore, our paper seeks to illustrate potential links between statistical discrimination, mobility,
tenure and wage profiles. We use the statistical discrimination model proposed by Oettinger (1996)
to explain racial wage gaps as our starting point. Thus a worker?s productivity is assumed to depend
on the quality of the job match. It is further assumed that it is more costly for an employer to assess
female workers? productivity. Finally, the model allows productivity to become less noisy with tenure.
As in Altonji and Pierret (2001) and Altonji (2005), we assume that employers learn about workers?
characteristics and productivity over time. However, unlike Oettinger (1996), we assume that female
workers? productivity remains noisy with tenure, while male workers? noise/signal ratio is assumed to
be zero in the second period of their two-period lives.
Oettinger (1996) conjectured that even if asymmetries and informational imperfections were only
transient, they could nevertheless generate permanent wage differentials between racial groups. By
assuming away perfect productivity revelation for women, our model does indeed show that gender
wage gaps may appear within the first years of the working lives and may be permanent. Furthermore,
the model provides a simple framework within which gender differences in terms of tenure, experience
and mobility can be better understood.
The model generates a series of predictions that we test against U.S. data from the 1979 cohort
of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. It turns out most theoretical predictions are supported
by the data. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the structure of the model and
3
its basic assumptions. Section 3 presents the wage profiles that characterize the equilibrium and
emphasizes theoretical implications with respect to gender differences in mobility. Finally, Section 4
presents the empirical results and Section 5 concludes the paper.
2 The Structure of the Model
Our approach is based on the dynamic statistical discrimination model setup by Oettinger (1996),
which incorporates the notion of job-matching. In particular, like Oettinger, we assume that the pro-
ductivity of any job match is imperfectly observed ex ante, that the initial productivity signal is noisier
for the ?minority? group (i.e. women in the present paper) and that additional information about the
productivity of the match is revealed with tenure on the job. Our contribution is to extend Oettinger?s
framework by allowing for the possibility that match productivity is not revealed completely for women
as job tenure accumulates and consequently female workers? productivity remains less reliable. It turns
out that this simple generalization substantially expands the set of empirical predictions with respect
to male-female differences in starting wages, wage levels for experienced workers and wage growth.
In our model, the agents are competitive firms who negotiate compensation with employees one-
on-one and offer each a wage equal to his or her expected productivity, conditional upon all available
information, and income-maximizing workers who take mobility decisions based on their expected
wage schedules. Before we describe the agent?s objective functions and determine the equilibrium, it
is essential to precise the informational context in which firms make their wage decisions.
Employees are assumed to work for two periods (t = 1,2) and maximize expected compensation
over their working lives. At the beginning of each period t, a worker receives exactly one job offer.
The true productivity of an employee in the job offered at period t, ?ti , is a random variable whose
distribution is known and identical for men and women: ?ti ?N
(
??i ,?
2
?i
)
.
Individuals? productivity depends on the quality of their job match. Moreover, for each individual,
4
the true quality of the new job offers received in the two periods, ?1i and ?2i , are independent draws
from the underlying match productivity distribution. This latter assumption, standard in Jovanovic
(1979) ensures that employees? history is irrelevant to the evaluation of his/her productivity in any
newly formed match.
The quality of the match is vulnerable to informational imperfections on both sides of the market.
Productivity is ex ante unknown in any potential, but untested, match. Before the match actually
occurs, employers and employees alike do not know precisely what the exact productivity will be. It
can only be ascertained by observing employee i in the job offered at t. More precisely, during the
first period all workers will be employed in the job they were offered at the beginning of the period.
Let the observed productivity of worker i be given by:
s j1i = ?1i +?
j
1i , where ?
j
1i ?N
(
0,?2?j
)
, j ? {f ,m} , (1)
and where superscripts f and m stand for female and male workers, respectively. We assume that
?1i and ?1i are not correlated. At the start of the second period, the worker must decide whether
to stay on the job or move to a new job. If the new offer is accepted, both parties will observe the
productivity in the new match with error, as in the first job, i.e.
s j2i = ?2i +?
j
2i , where ?
j
2i ?N
(
0,?2?j
)
, j ? {f ,m} . (2)
If the worker stays in the first-period job, his/her true productivity remains ?1i , since our model
assumes away investment in human capital. On the other hand, the two parties will better assess the
true productivity, ?1i . For stayers we may write observed second-period productivity as:
s ?j1i = ?1i + v
j
i , where v
j
i ?N
(
0,?2v j
)
and ?2v j < ?
2
?j , j ? {f ,m}. (3)
5
As in Phelps (1972), gender differences occur essentially through the quality of the productivity
signal, i.e. ?2
?f
> ?2?m . We further assume that a gap remains irrespective of tenure. This assumption
departs from Oettinger (1996) who assumed that the noise/signal ratio vanished after the first period.
In fact we assume this to be the case for men, but not for women, i.e. 0 = ?2vm < ?
2
v f
.
The gender difference in the individual productivity uncertainty has often been justified on cultural
grounds [Cornell and Welch (1996); Lazear (1999)]. For example, Henley (1977) and Lang (1986)
stress that men and women differ in their communication style and therefore the evaluation process
is subject to greater ?error? if the candidate is a woman, given that employers and managers are
disproportionately men. In the same spirit, Montgomery (1991) shows formally that information
about the least represented group in the top-level jobs is usually of lower quality. Recently, Altonji
(2005) has argued that unemployment is likely to interact with early statistical discrimination to deter
employers? learning. To the extent women typically suffer from higher unemployment then men, they
may be less able to convey their true productivity. For all these reasons it seems legitimate to assume
that gender differences in the measurement of individual productivity arises not only at the time of
hire, but also during employment.
Formally we assume that firms are competitive and risk-neutral, negotiating employee compensa-
tion on an individual basis. Employers will offer wages equal to individual expected productivity due to
the binding zero expected profits in both periods. In the first period, wage profiles can thus be written
as:
w j1i = E
(
?1i
???s j1i ) , j ? {f ,m}. (4)
Likewise, second-period wage contracts are determined by individuals? productivity signal, i.e. s ?j1i if
individual i remains on the job, and s j2i otherwise. We thus have w
j
2i = E(?1i |s ?j1i) for ?stayers? and
w j2i = E(?2i |s j2i) for ?movers?. A worker will choose to change jobs if, and only if, the expected
6
wage in the second-period job offer exceeds the expected wage in the current job, that is if ??j2i ?
E
(
?2i
???s j2i )> ??j1i ? E(?1i ???s ?j1i ) . Wages in the second period can thus be written
w j2i =
???????
??j1i , if ??
j
1i = E
(
?1i
???s ?j1i )? ??j2i = E(?2i ???s j2i ) (stayer),
??j2i , if ??
j
1i < ??
j
2i (mover).
(5)
Note that the productivity of a male stayer will be perfectly observed. His compensation will be
wm2i = ??
m
1i = ?1i and the condition to remain on his original job is ??
m
2i ? ??1i . Naturally these conditions
do not apply to female workers. We will now examine the equilibrium solution and analyze how gender
wage gaps may arise.
3 Equilibrium Wage Profiles
Equilibrium is determined by the optimization behavior of employers and employees. Firms, which are
in a competitive environment, maximize profits by proposing wages, which reflect expected productivity
conditional on the individual signal and the group membership. Workers take mobility decisions that
maximize their expected lifetime earnings. We will characterize wage profiles in the two periods before
drawing conclusions about the returns of mobility, tenure, and experience.
3.1 First-Period Wages
For the first period, our analytical framework is identical to the initial statistical discrimination model
developed by Phelps (1972) and Aigner and Cain (1977). We obtain the standard result according to
which wage contracts are a weighted average of mean productivity (??) and of the individual signal,
s j1i :
w j1i = E(?1i |s j1i) = (1??2j )??+?2j s j1i , j ? {f ,m}, (6)
7
where ?2j = ?
2
?/
(
?2?+?
2
?j
)
.2
The weight ?2j can be interpreted as a measure of the quality of the signal. Thus the greater the
reliability of the signal, the more employers will individualize wage rates. Clearly, given the assumption
that women?s signals are less reliable,3 employers will discriminate ?rationally? between men and
women by offering them different wages. When setting the starting wage of women, they will tend
to emphasize the average characteristics of the group over individual performance in order to guard
against possible measurement errors. Consequently, men and women with the same productivity
signals, s1, will receive different compensations. Women with a strong initial signal will receive a lower
pay than their male counterparts, and conversely for a weak productivity signal. The wage profile
offered to women during the first period is thus less steep than that offered to men, and women?s
compensation is more clustered around mean productivity, ??. Men?s wages will in fact have a higher
variance
(
?2m?
2
?
)
than women?s
(
?2f ?
2
?
)
. Yet, men and women will receive the same wage rate upon
entry into the labor market. Indeed, expected pay in the first period is invariant with respect to the
reliability of the signals
E
(
w j1i
)
= ??, j ? {f ,m} , ??2j . (7)
Thus first period mean wages are equal to mean productivity, which we assume identical across gender.
3.2 Second-Period Wages
Second period wage profiles depend on mobility behavior. As shown previously, stayers? wage rates
are characterized by w j2i = ??
j
1i = E
(
?1i
???s ?j1i ) and those of the movers by w j2i = ??j2i = E(?2i ???s j2i ). A
worker continues with the same job only if ??j1i ? ??j2i and conversely changes jobs if ??j1i < ??j2i . Because
mobility is endogenous, non-random selection between movers and stayers must be accounted for
2To show this, observe that ?1i and s
j
1i are normal bivariates with correlation coefficient ?
2
j =
?2?/
(
?2?+?
2
?j
)
. The result follows from computing the conditional expectation.
3The assumption ?2?m < ?
2
?f
implies ?2f < ?
2
m.
8
when characterizing mean compensation. Thus,
? the average second-period wage is given by:
E
[
??j1i
??? ??j1i ? ??j2i ? 0]= ??+ ?2j?
?2j +?
2
j
(
2?2?
pi
)1/2
, j ? {f ,m} (8)
for stayers.
? and
E
[
??j2i
??? ??j2i ? ??j1i > 0]= ??+ ?2j?
?2j +?
2
j
(
2?2?
pi
)1/2
, j ? {f ,m} (9)
for movers,
where ?2j = ?
2
?/(?
2
?+?
2
v j
). For stayers, ?2j is a measure of the quality of the signal similar to ?
2
j in
the first period.4 Moreover, since the productivity revelation mechanism is perfect for men (?2vm = 0)
but imperfect for women (?2
v f
> 0), we have 1 = ?2m > ?
2
f . Note that the mean conditional wage rate
in the second period is equal to the worker?s mean productivity (??), adjusted for the quality of the
signal. The expected wage of a mover is lower than that of a stayer
(
?2j < ?
2
j because ?
2
v < ?
2
?
)
.
Our model generates positive returns to work experience and tenure. At the beginning of the
second period, a mover has one period of experience as an asset, but no tenure, whereas a stayer has
both one period of experience and one period of tenure. Thus movers? mean wage differential between
the first and the second period characterizes the average return to experience, while the average return
to tenure is given by the second-period mean wage differential between stayers and movers. Average
returns to experience and tenure are thus given respectively by:
?2j?
?2j +?
2
j
(
2?2?
pi
)1/2
and
?2j ??2j?
?2j +?
2
j
(
2?2?
pi
)1/2
.
4Their wage profile is w j2i = (1? ?2j )??+ ?2j s ?j1i
9
The positive return to tenure captures the fact that the signal is less noisy in the second period. The
unconditional second-period mean wage of group j can be derived from equations (8) and (9):
E(w j2i) = Pr
(
??j1i ? ??j2i
)
E
[
??j1i
??? ??j1i ? ??j2i ? 0]
+Pr
(
??j2i > ??
j
1i
)
E
[
??j2i
??? ??j2i ? ??j1i < 0]
= ??+
[
(?2j +?
2
j )?
2
?
2pi
]1/2
, j ? {f ,m} . (10)
Thus on average workers earn more in the second period because they self-select into the best
possible match. Unlike first-period wage rate, second-period wages increase with the reliability of the
signals, ?2j and ?
2
j . The better they are, the more profitable the selection process is likely to be on
average. Indeed, mistakes such as changing jobs that prove to be a worse match, or foregoing a
job change that would have been profitable can be better avoided when productivity signals are more
precise.
In this context, male workers should benefit more from mobility. In the second period they should
on average receive higher wages than their female co-workers. Our model thus predicts that even if
there is no gender wage gap at entry into the labor market, it will appear as careers unfold.
3.3 Wages and Mobility
We now consider between-period wage changes. The expected wage change for stayers is given by
E
[
??j1i ? ??j1i
??? ??j1i ? ??j2i ? 0] while that of movers is given by E[ ??j2i ? ??j1i ??? ??j2i ? ??j1i > 0] . It can easily
10
be shown that
E
[
??j1i ? ??j1i
??? ??j1i ? ??j2i ? 0] = ?2j
(
1??2j
)
?
?2j +?
2
j
(
2?2?
pi
)1/2
, (11)
E
[
??j2i ? ??j1i
??? ??j2i ? ??j1i > 0] = ?2j
(
1+ ?2j
)
?
?2j +?
2
j
(
2?2?
pi
)1/2
. (12)
From equations (11) and (12) it is clear that the expected wage change is positive for both stayers
and movers. This result is not surprising since mobility is endogenous. If ?2? < ?
2
? ?a reasonable
assumption? movers will clearly experience greater wage increases than stayers on average. Indeed
wage changes for stayers solely reflect corrections to productivity measurement errors. Conversely,
wage changes are essentially attributable to productivity changes in the case of movers.
In summary, our model yields many unambiguous theoretical predictions that can be empirically
tested. For both sexes we find that:
1. wage profiles are increasing, on average;
2. experience and tenure show positive returns;
3. movers? mean wage is lower than that of stayers. But
4. their wage growth is greater (assuming that ?2? < ?
2
?).
As for the male-female wage gap, several results emerge:
1. for identical productivity signals, employers offer compensations that differ across gender;
2. upon entry into the labor market, men and women earn the same wage on average;
3. however, a gender wage gap emerges in the initial years of their working lives.
Some of these predictions are similar to those derived by Oettinger (1996). In fact, the equilibrium
described by Oettinger (1996) is a special case of our model in which ?2j = 1, ?j . However, this
11
assumption is not innocuous since the productivity revelation mechanism plays an important role in
the determination of the second period wage rate. Moreover, our generalization complicates the
analysis with respect to differences in the return to mobility and tenure, and changes a number of
conclusions. For instance, unlike Oettinger (1996), we cannot assert that women should always have
higher returns to tenure than men because the reliability of the initial signals
(
?2j
)
and the precision
of the revelation mechanism
(
?2j
)
act in opposite directions. Likewise, the impact of ?2j on movers?
mean wage increase is ambiguous.
3.4 Male-Female Gap in the Return to Mobility
The analysis of gender differences in terms of return to job mobility and tenure is slightly more complex.
However, we will show that the sign of these differences not only depends on the male-female gap in
the reliability of the initial signals, but also on the magnitude of the variances of the shocks
(
?2
?f
,?2
v f
)
relative to the variance of the productivity
(
?2?
)
.
To ease the derivation of the results let k ? ]0,1] be such that ?2?m = k?2?f , ?=
?2
?f
?2?
, and ? =
?2
vf
?2?
.
We can rewrite the conditions pertaining to the gender differences in job mobility and tenure in terms
of k , ? and ?. Thus for the average wage of male stayers to be higher to that of female stayers, it is
necessary and sufficient according to equation (8) that:5
1?
1+?2m
? ?
2
f?
?2f +?
2
f
, or equivalently that k ? kA = ??? (3+?+?)
?[1+? (3+?+?)]
. (13)
By the same reasoning, we can derive the following predictions based on equations (8),(9),(11) and
5Recall that Oettinger (1996)?s model implicitly assumes that: ?2
v f
= 0 and thus that ? = 0 in our
framework. His model thus boils down to assuming that k = 1, i.e. that women?s productivity signal
is no more noisy than men?s signal. Consequently his model precludes male stayers to have a higher
mean average wage.
12
(12):6
1. Among the stayers, men?s average wage will be higher than women?s if kA ? k ? 1;
2. Among the movers, men?s average wage will be higher than women?s if 0? k ? kB;
3. For male stayers to experience greater wage growth, it must be the case that kC ? k ? 1;
4. The condition for the male movers? wage growth to exceed that of female movers always obtains;
5. Men?s return to tenure will be higher than women?s if kE ? k ? 1.
Ranking these various threshold values of k would allow us to characterize a limited number
of baseline cases. The complexity of kA, kB, kC , and kE is such that we must turn to numerical
simulation. However, if we make the reasonable assumption that the residual variances (?2
?f
, ?2
v f
) are
much smaller than the variance of productivity (?2?), then ? will be comprised in the interval [0,1], and
? in [0,?] due to the manner in which productivity gets less noisy with job tenure7. It can be shown
that (kA?kE), (kE?kC), (kE?kB) are always negative irrespective of ? and ?, while (kB?kC) can
be both positive or negative. Consequently only six baseline cases need be examined. Our model?s
predictions are summarized in Table 1.
Contrary to Oettinger (1996), our results depend on the discrepancy in the reliability of men?s
and women?s signals. In Oettinger (1996), productivity revelation is perfect, i.e. ?2
v f
= 0, implying
? = 0. This assumption has important repercussions for the threshold values. In fact, for ? = 0 we
6The expressions for kB, kC , and kE are respectively:
kB =
?3(1+?)+
?
9(1+?)2+4(1+?)(1+?)(2+?+?)?8(1+?)2
2?(1+?)
,
kC =
3?+
?
9?2+8[(1+?)(1+?)(2+?+?)??2]
2[(1+?)(1+?)(2+?+?)??2] ,
kE =
(???)[3??3?+
?
9(???)2+8[(1+?)(1+?)(2+?+?)? (???)2]
2?[(1+?)(1+?)(2+?+?)? (???)2] .
The derivation of kB,kC and kE is available from the authors.
7?2
?f
? ?2v implies that ? ? ?.
13
Table 1: Male-female differences in the return to job mobility
and tenure
Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6
0? k ? kA kA ? k ? kE kE ? k ? kB kB ? k ? kC kC ? k ? kB kC ? k ? 1
Mean Wages in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of
of stayers women men men men men men
Mean Wages in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of
of movers men men men women men women
Return to in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of
Tenure women women men men men men
Mean-Wage in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of
Gain, stayers women women women women men men
Mean-Wage in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of in favor of
Gain, movers men men men men men men
find that kA = kB = kC = kE = 1. Consequently, whatever the value of k ?]0,1], we find that k ? kA.
Furthermore, we can show that the predictions in Oettinger (1996) correspond to the first column of
Table 1. Recall that his model yielded a positive gap in men?s returns to mobility, and that tenure was
more highly valued by women.
An empirical study based on wage equations will allow us to distinguish between the differences in
the returns of job mobility and tenure for men and women. We can then establish whether the data
are consistent with any of our theoretical predictions.
4 Data and Empirical Analysis
4.1 The Sample
In this section, we test the unambiguous predictions of our statistical discrimination model and focus
on the theoretical ambiguities surrounding differences in the returns to job mobility and tenure. In
particular, the analysis will attempt to shed some light on how the wage gap evolves in the earliest
stages of work and on the importance of job mobility in the process.
To test the theory, we use data drawn from the 1979 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth (NLSY). This survey follows a cohort representative of young Americans aged 14 to 21 in
14
1979. It provides extensive longitudinal data on educational achievements, wages, and work experience
from 1979 to 2008. In this study we focus on white individuals from the cross-sectional sample of the
NLSY and exclude the supplemental sample of economically disadvantaged whites.
Our aim is to follow the evolution of wages at the beginning of young adults? career. Since our
model does not include labor supply, we follow Oettinger (1996) by focusing on an individual?s first
observable transition from weak to strong labor force attachment. Respondents are considered to be
strongly attached to the labor force during a specific survey year if they worked at least half of all
weeks since the last survey,8 and if they worked at least an average of 30 hours during each of those
weeks. The onset of a respondent?s career is the first of three consecutive survey years of strong
labor force attachment that follow one year of weak labor force attachment.9 We then follow each
respondent?s wage evolution for up to ten years following that first transition into strong labor force
attachment, keeping in our sample only wage observations preceded by a year of strong labor force
attachment.10 Consistent with our requirement of measuring wages every year, we do not consider
NLSY data collected after 1994 since surveys were then conducted every two years.
Wage is measured at the end of each year of strong labor force attachment.11 We use hourly
wage for a job held at the time of the survey. If a respondent holds more than one job at the time of
the survey, we use the hourly wage for the job at which the respondent worked most hours. Wages
8The number of weeks between each survey is not necessarily 52 weeks, so we restrict our sample
to respondents-survey years with 45 to 59 weeks since the last survey.
9Respondents who are observed to have strong labor force attachment in survey year 1979 are
excluded from the sample.
10We also experimented with a sample that excluded individuals who experienced one year of weak
labor force attachment after their first three years of strong attachment. This results in a much
smaller sample, larger standard errors, but qualitatively similar results.
11Ideally we would have identified the respondent?s ?first job? and the wage associated with that
job. However, the NLSY provides no question or variable referring to an individual?s first job. Many
respondents hold jobs while enrolled in school, but these may not be jobs associated with their eventual
careers. Other respondents may be out of school and hold jobs, but are not strongly attached to the
labor market. This makes it hard to identify the first job associated with their eventual career and
we opted instead to look at hourly wage for jobs held at the end of each year of strong labor force
attachment.
15
are measured in 2004 dollars and included in the sample if they are greater than $1 and less than $60.
Educational achievements is measured using years of completed schooling. We focus on individuals
who have completed at least 13 years of education at the end of their career?s first year. The rationale
is that our model assumes male and female workers to have the same level of commitment to the
labor market. This assumption is more likely to hold in a sample of individuals who have invested in
post-secondary education. The sample of individuals with no post-secondary education may display
greater variation in their attachment to the labor force, and the mechanisms behind this variation likely
differ between men and women given that women?s educational and labor supply choices are affected
by their fertility decisions. Although fertility decisions also affect female workers with post-secondary
decisions, it can be argued that higher household earnings and stronger investments in human capital
of more educated couples reduce the scope for fertility decisions affecting female labor supply.
The model has strong predictions about the impact of work experience, job tenure, and job changes
on wages. Work experience is a variable that counts the number of year of strong labor force attach-
ment since the first transition into strong attachment. Job tenure measures the number of consecutive
weeks at a given job. To identify a job change, we compare the week when the currently held job
started, to the week when the previous survey interview took place. If the currently held job started
after the previous survey, a respondent is considered to have changed jobs.
Our model makes it clear that job changes are triggered if workers receive large shocks to their
productivity signals, or if they get good productivity draws with another employer. These produc-
tivity draws and signal shocks are observed by the worker, but not by the econometrician, and are
incorporated in the error term of our wage equation. This error term is therefore correlated with
any explanatory variable describing job changes or job tenure. These variables are instrumented using
lagged job changes, lagged job tenure, and lagged annual hours of work. We used lagged values
because our model assumes that productivity draws and signal shocks are not correlated across pe-
16
riods. The first two instruments should be correlated with current job changes and tenure through
other factors not correlated with the worker?s own wage, such as shocks to household structure, or
a stronger preference for job mobility. Lagged hours of work should identify job changes triggered by
adjustment on the labor supply margin, rather than wages.
To proxy ability, our regressions include the score percentile of the Armed Force Qualification
Test (AFQT).12 This variable is meant to capture the fact that employers may partly observe the
worker?s ability and adjust compensation accordingly. We also include a dummy variable that controls
for whether the job is covered by a collective bargaining agreement, acknowledging the fact that
other external mechanisms may determine wages. In the same vein we include dummy variables for
occupation and industry to reflect how work in these different professions and firms are rewarded in
the product market.13
Our sample consists of 505 women, and 474 men with at least some college whom we observe
a year following their first transition into strong labor force attachment. Table 2 provides summary
statistics on some of the variables used in the empirical analysis. It shows the distribution of the
year during which workers made their transition into strong labor force attachment. For 90% of the
sample, this first transition took place in years 1980 to 1988. On average these workers made their
first transition into the labor force at the age of 23, which is consistent with the fact that they
completed on average 15 years of education. Almost 57% of the sample had completed 4 years or
12The AFQT score aggregates results for tests on word knowledge, paragraph comprehension,
mathematics knowledge, and arithmetic reasoning. The AFQT is a subset of the Armed Services
Vocational Aptitude Battery administered to NLSY respondents in 1980. At that time, age varied
from 15 to 22 among respondents, it is known that performance on the AFQT test is positively
correlated with age at time of the test. We therefore use AFQT test scores adjusted for age at the
time of the test.
13Previous research has shown that occupations and industries are coded with error in the NLSY.
We ignore any industry change that is not associated with a job change. Occupation is allowed to
change without any job change. However, we ignore any occupation ?cycling? within the same job:
if an occupation change is observed within the same job, it is ignored if the occupation at this same
job is observed to have changed again at the next survey interview.
17
more of college by the time of their first transition.
At the end of the first year of strong labor force attachment, women and men earn an average
hourly wage rate of $12 and $13, respectively. Two years later, their respective average hourly wage
rate has increased to $14 and $16. As many as 72% of men and 67% for women change job at the
end of their first year of employment. But mobility decreases as their careers unfold, down to about
30% for men and women by the end of the third year. By that time, 14% of male and female workers
are covered by a collective agreement.
Labor supply during that first year of strong labor force attachment is quite similar for men and
women. Indeed, men worked on average 1,950 hours over 46 weeks, while women worked 1,800 hours
over 45 weeks. Two years on, labor supply is slightly higher for workers of both genders.
After their first year of strong attachment, the majority of women are either professionals (36%)
or clerical workers (30%). Two years on, both occupations are still the most prevalent at 43% and
26%, respectively. Early on, men are more likely to work as professionals (37%) or service workers
(11%) and managers (11%). Two years on, they are mostly professionals (38%), managers (13%),
and sales workers (11%).
The two most prevalent industries for women are professional and related services (39%) and
in wholesale or retail trade (21%). Two years on, these two industries represent respectively 38%
and 19% of all jobs. Male workers work mostly in wholesale and retail trade, manufacturing and
professional services industry (20% each). Two years on, the professional service industry represents
19% while manufacturing?s share is higher (24%).
4.2 Estimation Results
We test our model?s predictions using reduced-form log-wage regressions. Our sample includes all
individuals that have completed at least three years of strong labor force attachment following one
18
year of weak labor attachment. We follow their hourly wage over those first three years of strong labor
force attachment, but we also add to our sample hourly wages observed after a year of strong labor
force attachment over the next seven years. Our sample of individual-wage observations contains real
wages (in 2004 dollars) from 1980 to 1994.
4.2.1 The Gender Wage Gap
The main results concerning the gender wage gap are presented in Table 3. All results presented
in Table 3 are OLS estimates. The first column contains results for a model where we only control
for gender, age, years of education, AFQT, and a dummy variable for collective bargaining.14 This
column shows that female wages are about 8.3% lower than that of men, and that this gender wage
gap is statistically significant. Since there is no control for work experience, age is associated with
strong wage growth. As expected, years of education, AFQT and collective bargaining are associated
with higher wages.
Models 2 to 4 gradually add more variables to the model and allows us to study how that affects
the gender wage gap. In Model 2 we add a variable for work experience, which is measured by years
of strong labor force attachment. As expected years of experience are associated with strong wage
growth: 4.2% for each year of strong labor force attachment. Even after adding years of experience,
we still find that women earn on average 8.3% less per hour of work.
In Model 3 we add an interaction term between work experience and the gender dummy variable.
Remember that the model predicts that male and female workers have the same starting wage, and
that the lower quality of productivity signaling for women implies that female wage should grow at
a slower rate. Consistent with this, we find that the gender wage gap is reduced to less than 2%
and is not statistically significant. Moreover, the parameter on the interaction between gender and
14Although we do not present the results here, we also include in all models a set of dummy variables
to account for occupation and industry.
19
work experience also reveals that wage growth is weaker for women: one year of strong labor force
attachment leads to a 3.4% wage growth, compared to 4.9% for men, and this difference is statistically
significant.15
Other mechanisms could generate weaker wage growth for women. If most women in our sample
expect to have children and therefore make fewer on-the-job human capital investments, we should
observe weaker wage growth for women. In Model 4, we include variables that control for marital status
and the presence of children at home. The dummy variable for being married and its interaction with
gender indicate that being married is associated with higher wages, but much less so for women. The
parameter on a dummy variable for the presence of at least one child in the household indicates that
having children is associated with lower wages.16 Including these household related variables show
that the gap in wage growth from strong labor force attachment decreases, but remains statistically
significant at 1%, compared to 1.5% in Model 3. It suggests that part of the weaker female wage
growth may be explained by different on-the-job human capital investments.
4.2.2 Job Changes and Job Tenure
Our model also has predictions regarding the comparative wages of workers who keep the same job
(stayers) and those who change job (movers). We test these predictions in Table 4. The first column
reports the results of Model 3 from Table 3 where it was found that controlling for years of experience
resulted in a statistically insignificant gender wage gap. Models 5 to 7 are 2SLS estimates. As
15These results are consistent with Loprest (1992) who uses the NLSY79 to find that women have
weaker wage growth than men. Although she also considers a sample of workers with consecutive
years of strong labor force attachment, her sample contains workers who did not go to college. If we
consider workers of all educational levels we still find that returns to experience are lower for women,
however this difference is not statistically different once marital and parental status are accounted for,
variables that are not considered in Loprest (1992).
16We also tried adding an interaction term between gender and the child dummy variable to Model
4. We found both the child dummy variable and its interaction with gender to be negative, but not
statistically significant.
20
explained in Section 4.1, job changes, and by construction job tenure, are endogenous variables. We
instrument them with their own lagged values, as well as lagged hours of work.
Model 5 of Table 4 adds a dummy variable indicating whether the individual changed job since the
last survey interview. We also include an interaction between gender and job change. Our results show
that movers have on average lower wages, as predicted by our model (see Section 3.3). Moreover, the
mover wage penalty is greater for women, indicating that the mean wage of movers is greater for men.
Note also that the coefficient on gender is now positive and statistically significant, indicating that,
among stayers, women have a higher mean wage. Stronger mean wage for women among stayers,
and stronger mean wage for men among movers is consistent with Case 1 of Table 1.
The coefficients associated with job changes in Model 5 of Table 4 are quite large. It is very
likely that these job changes are not all voluntary. Individuals who, in the high unemployment rates of
the early 1980s, suffered from layoffs, but remained in strong labor force attachment (a requirement
of our sample selection), may have done so by taking on a job (or multiple jobs) that offered lower
wages. Our results suggest that this might have been more severe for women. Compounding all of
this is the fact that we use lagged job change variables as instruments. These may tend to identify
the negative impact of job losses over multiple years on the wages of workers who nevertheless remain
in strong labor force attachment. However, it should be kept in mind that these are log hourly wage
regressions, so that measured in actual dollars, the impact of job changes represent small amounts.17
Model 6 includes a linear and quadratic term in job tenure weeks, as well as interactions between
these terms and gender.18 Tenure coefficients indicate that wages grow with tenure, as predicted by
our model. Moreover, this growth is significantly stronger for women, which is also consistent with
17For example, the intercept of Model 5 in Table 4 implies a base hourly wage of $4.58, relative to
an average wage of $16.68 in that regression sample. The coefficients for job change variables imply
that the base hourly wage of movers is around $3.52 for men and $1.78 for women.
18The quadratic term in tenure is divided by 10,000 for the sake of presentation. This should be
kept in mind when interpreting the value of its coefficient.
21
Case 1 of Table 1 which predicts larger returns to tenure for women. These coefficients on job tenure
imply that 52 weeks with the same employer lead to 4.1% wage growth for men, compared to 7.5%
for women.
Model 6 in Table 4 also suggests that women suffer from a marginally statistically significant wage
penalty of approximately 5%. This is probably due to the fact that workers with very low tenure
include those who changed jobs. These movers, and especially female movers, suffer from severe
wage penalties as shown in Model 5, and the assumed quadratic impact of job tenure is not flexible
enough to allow for this nonlinear impact of tenure. The gender dummy variable may therefore be
picking up the larger penalty of job changes for women. With Model 7 in Table 4 we study the joint
impact of job changes and tenure. We still find that workers suffer from changing jobs, although the
effect is not statistically significant for men (this result remains consistent with Case 1 of Table 1).
Tenure is still associated with statistically significant wage growth, but we find no stronger returns to
tenure for women, contrary to Model 6.19 Finally, we find that female stayers have higher average
wage, which is consistent with Model 5 and Case 1 of Table 1.
4.2.3 Wage Growth and Job Changes
A clear prediction of the model from Section 3.3 is that although movers? mean wage is lower than
that of stayers, their wage growth is stronger. To test this prediction, as well as predictions about
the mean wage gain across genders of stayers and movers (last two rows of Table 1), we study wage
growth in Table 5. The dependent variable is the difference between the current log hourly wage
and the log wage recorded at the previous survey. All regressions presented in Table 5 control for
19We also experimented with linear as well as quadratic terms in tenure (as in Model 6) but all
were imprecisely estimated. We therefore opted for the more parsimonious Model 7 with no quadratic
term.
22
collective bargaining coverage, occupation and industry.20 All regressions also control for age, years
of schooling, ability as measured by the AFQT score percentile, as well as a dummy variable for
gender. Model 8 shows that, consistent with our previous findings in Table 3, women have weaker
wage growth, although the coefficient is not precisely estimated. However, once we control for hours
of work in Model 9, the impact of gender is marginally statistically significant and in favor of men.
Hours of work can be seen as controls for the amount of on-the-job human capital investment, and
are associated with statistically significant stronger wage growth. Comparing the gender gap in wage
growth from Model 8 to 9 indicates that women can make up for their noisier productivity signals
through on-the-job investments.
One clear prediction of Section 3.3 is that movers should experience stronger wage growth. Model
9 tests this prediction by adding a dummy variable indicating whether the worker holds a job he was
not holding at the previous interview. As previously explained, this variable is endogenous. Because
we are now estimating wage growth equations, where lagged hourly wage are part of the dependent
variable, we instrument job change variables with second order lags of job changes and hours worked.
The coefficient on job change is positive and statistically significant, which is consistent with the
prediction of our model that movers should have stronger wage growth relative to stayers. Model
11 includes an interaction between job change and gender to test among movers and stayers which
gender has stronger mean wage gains. The results are inconclusive as the parameter estimate is not
statistically different from zero.
20We include dummy variables for all possible state transitions. For example, collective bargaining
includes a dummy variable for individuals who stayed covered by a collective agreement, a dummy
variable for individuals who lost their coverage, and a dummy variable for individuals who gained
collective bargaining agreement, leaving those who remained uncovered as the base case.
23
4.2.4 Implications for Signal Quality and Productivity Revelation Across Genders
Our empirical results support Case 1 of Table 1. This has implications for the comparison across
genders of signal quality in a new job, and the productivity revelation for workers who do not change
job. These matters because they are the source of wage growth and job mobility in our model.
Assuming that productivity revelation is perfect for men, Case 1 entails that signal quality in a new
job is good for men. For women signal quality is bad but productivity revelation is good.21 This implies
that only women with very low productivity or bad post-hiring noise do not keep their current job.
This tends to remove the extreme left part of the signal distribution among female stayers, increasing
their observed average wage. The average wage of male stayers also increases but to a smaller extent
because employers do not revise their expectations about their productivity so much as they do for
women. Contrary to women, the majority of male movers are not drawn only from extreme left tail
of the signal distribution because of their lower noise/signal ratio. It follows that male workers move
only if they get a much better draw (productivity and noise wise) at a new job, implying that among
movers, men have the largest average wage, whereas women have a higher average wage then men
among stayers. Estimates from Model 5 of Table 4 lend support to these conjectures: women stayers
have higher wage (coefficient on dummy for gender is positive and statistically significant) while male
movers earn on average more than female stayers (the interaction between gender and job change
dummy variables is negative and statistically significant).
Wage gains from staying at the same job depends solely on the improvement in signalling stemming
from holding on to a job. The conditions that lead to Case 1 implies that this improvement is stronger
for women, with the results that returns to tenure are stronger for women as found in Model 6 of Table
4. This also implies that wage growth among stayers should be stronger for women, but Models 10
21Remember from section 3.4 that Case 1 implies k < kA, where k decreases as the signal quality
increases for men, while kA increases as the signal quality for women weakens, and as the revelation
mechanism for women improves.
24
and 11 in Table 5 are inconclusive on this issue. The two models are also inconclusive with regards
to the predicted stronger movers wage growth among men. Wage gains for movers depend on the
quality of signalling at new jobs but also on the revelation mechanism, which are both stronger for
men.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we investigate the gender wage gap using a two-period model based on the theories of
matching and statistical discrimination. Simply by assuming that women?s true productivity is more
costly to measure, and that the noisiness of women?s signal tapers off less rapidly than men?s, it is
possible to generate a series of theoretical predictions about wage gaps. These pertain to the relation
between wage gaps and mobility, tenure and experience. To our knowledge, only three other papers
[Oettinger (1996); Neumark (1999); Altonji and Pierret (2001)] have empirically tested the validity
of the theory of statistical discrimination within a similar framework.
The theoretical predictions are tested using U.S. data from the 1979 cohort of the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth. The data supports most of these predictions. We find that, though
men and women with post-secondary education earn identical wages upon entry into the labor market,
a substantial gap emerges in men?s favor in the next few years. Other clear predictions of the model are
supported: work experience and tenure are associated with higher wages. Average wages are higher
among workers who do not change job (stayers), while job changers (movers) experience stronger
wage growth.
The theoretical model has ambiguous predictions about gender-related mean wage among stayers,
mean wage among movers, returns to tenure, mean wage gains among stayers, and mean wage gains
of movers. However, the model provides enough structure to limit its predictions to six possible cases,
which we present in Table 1. Although our results are inconclusive with regards to mean wages gains,
25
we find evidence that supports Case 1 whereby women have stronger mean wages among stayers and
stronger returns to tenure, while men have stronger mean wages among movers. Case 1 implies that
employers are better at inferring the productivity of new male employees, while finding it much more
difficult to do so with female employees. However, Case 1 also implies that employers eventually get
a precise estimate of female workers? productivity with tenure.
26
References
Aigner, Denis, and Glen Cain (1977) ?Statistical theories of discrimination in labor market.? Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 30(2), 175?187
Altonji, Joseph (2005) ?Employer learning, statistical discrimination and occupational attainment.?
American Economic Review 95(2), 112?117
Altonji, Joseph, and Charles Pierret (2001) ?Employer learning and statistical discrimination.? Quaterly
Journal of Economics 116(1), 313?350
Altonji, Joseph, and Rebecca Blank (1999) ?Race and gender in the labor market.? In Handbook of
Labor Economics, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, vol. 3C Elsevier Science, North-Holland
pp. 3143?3259
Arrow, Kenneth (1973) ?The theory of discrimination.? In Discrimination in Labor Markets, ed. Orley
Ashenfelter and Albert Rees Princeton University Press pp. 3?33
Barron, John, Dan Black, and Mark Loewenstein (1993) ?Gender differences in training, capital, and
wages.? Journal of Human Resources 28(2), 343?364
Becker, Gary (1957) The Economics of Discrimination, second edition ed. (The University of Chicago
Press Economics)
Black, Dan (1995) ?Discrimination in a equilibrium search model.? Journal of Labor Economics
13(2), 309?334
Bowlus, Audra, and Zvi Eckstein (2002) ?Discrimination and skill differences in a equilibrium search
model.? International Economic Review 43(4), 1309?1345
Burdett, Kenneth (1978) ?A theory of employee job search and quit rates.? American Economic Review
68(1), 212?220
Cain, Glen (1986) ?The economic analysis of labor market discrimination : A survey.? In Handbook
of Labor Economics, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, vol. 1 Elsevier Publishing Company
pp. 693?785
Coate, Stephen, and Glenn Loury (1993) ?Will affirmative-action policies eliminate negative stereotypes
?? American Economic Review 83(5), 1220?1240
Cornell, Bardford, and Ivo Welch (1996) ?Culture, information, and screening discrimination.? Journal
of Political Economy 104(3), 542?571
Del Bono, Emilia, and Daniela Vuri (2011) ?Job mobility and the gender wage gap in Italy.? Labour
Economics 18(1), 130?142
Fang, Hanming, and Andrea Moro (2011) ?Theories of statistical discrimination and affirmative action:
A survey.? In Handbook of Social Economics, ed. Jess Benhabib, Matthew Jackson, and Alberto
Bisin, vol. 1A The Netherlands: North-Holland pp. 133?200
Flabbi, Luca (2010) ?Gender discrimination estimation in a search model with matching and bargain-
ing.? International Economic Review 51(3), 745?783
27
Fryer, Roland (2007) ?Belief flipping in a dynamic model of statistical discrimination.? Journal of Public
Economics 91, 1151?1166
Havet, Nathalie (2004) ?Ecarts salariaux et disparite?s professionnelles entre sexes : de?veloppements
the?oriques et validite? empirique.? l?Actualite? Economique, Revue d?Analyse Economique 80, 3?31
Havet, Nathalie, and Catherine Sofer (2008) ?Why do women?s wages increase so slowly throughout
their career? A dynamic model of statistical discrimination.? Labour 22(2), 291?314
Henley, Nancy (1977) Body Politics : Power, Sex and Nonverbal Communication (N-J : Prentice-Hall)
Jovanovic, Boyan (1979) ?Job matching and the theory of turnover.? Journal of Political Economy
87(5), 972?980
Lang, Kevin (1986) ?A language theory of discrimination.?Quaterly Journal of Economics 101(2), 363?
382
Lazear, Edward (1999) ?Culture and language.? Journal of Political Economy 107(6), S46?S126
Lazear, Edward, and Sherwin Rosen (1990) ?Male-female wage differentials in job ladders.? Journal of
Labor Economics 8(1), S106?S123
Light, Audrey, and Manuelita Ureta (1992) ?Panel estimates of male and female job turnover behavior:
can female nonquitters be identified?? Journal of Labor Economics 10(2), 156?181
Loprest, Pamela (1992) ?Gender differences in wage growth and job mobility.? American Economic
Review 82(2), 526?532
Lundberg, Shelly, and Richard Startz (1983) ?Private discrimination and social intervention in com-
petitive labor market.? American Economic Review 73(3), 340?347
Manning, Alan, and Joanna K. Swaffield (2008) ?The gender gap in early-career wage growth.? The
Economic Journal 118(530), 983?1024
Montgomery, James D. (1991) ?Social networks and labour market outcomes : Towards an economic
analysis.? American Economic Review 81(5), 1408?1418
Moro, Andrea (2003) ?The effect of statistical discrimination on black-white wage differentials: Esti-
mating a model with multiple equilibrium.? International Economic Review 44(2), 467?500
Moro, Andrea, and Peter Norman (2004) ?General equilibrium model of statistical discrimination.?
Journal of Economic Theory 114(1), 1?30
Napari, Sami (2009) ?Gender differences in early-career wage growth.? Labour Economics 16, 140?148
Neumark, David (1999) ?Wage differentials by race and sex : The roles of taste discrimination and
labor market information.? Industrial Relations 38(3), 414?445
Oettinger, Gerald (1996) ?Statistical discrimination and the early career evolution of the black-white
wage gap.? Journal of Labor Economics 14(1), 52?78
Phelps, Edmund (1972) ?The statistical theory of racism and sexism.? American Economic Review
62(4), 659?661
28
Rosen, Asa (2003) ?Search, bargaining and employer discrimination.? Journal of Labor Economics
21(4), 807?829
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz (1982) ?A model of employment outcomes illustrating the
effect of the structure of information on the level and distribution of income.? Economics Letters
10, 231?236
Sasaki, Masaru (1999) ?An equilibrium search model with coworker discrimination.? Journal of Labor
Economics 17(2), 377?407
Sattinger, Michael (1996) ?Search and discrimination.? Labour Economics 3(2), 143?167
Simpson, Wayne (1990) ?Starting even? job mobility and the wage gap between young single males
and females.? Applied Economics 22(6), 723?737
Sulis, Giovanni (2011) ?Gender wage differentials in Italy: A structural estimation approach.? Journal
of Population Economics 25(1), 53?87
29
Table 2: Descriptive statistics
Men Women
Entry Year and Age
Before 1983 23.0% 26.7%
1983 12.2% 14.7%
1984 14.8% 16.4%
1985 14.6% 15.3%
1986 13.5% 10.3%
After 1986 21.9% 16.6%
Age 23.2 22.8
Entry Education
Years of Education 15.4 15.2
At Least 16 Years of Education 56.3% 57.2%
Wage, Job Change, Job Tenure, Collective Bargaining
After First Year
Hourly Wage (2004 $) 12.96 11.67
Job Change 71.5% 67.4%
Job Tenure (Weeks) 52.0 53.3
Collective Bargaining 10.7% 11.7%
After Third Year
Hourly Wage (2004 $) 16.32 13.81
Changed Job 29.5% 29.6%
Job Tenure (Weeks) 109.2 106.6
Collective Bargaining 13.6% 14.1%
Labor Supply
After First Year
Weeks Worked 45.6 45.3
Hours Worked 1,956 1,803
After Third Year
Weeks Worked 50.7 50.3
Hours Worked 2,305 2,131
Sample includes white men and women who are observed transitioning from one
year of weak labor force attachment (LFA) to three consecutive years of strong
LFA, and who had completed at least one year of college by the end of their first
year of strong LFA. The definition of strong LFA is provided in section 4.1. The
entry year is the survey year during which the individual is observed having
completed their first year of strong LFA.
Table 3: The Gender Wage Gap and Work Experience
Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
Intercept 1.1794 1.4314 1.3911 1.3898
(0.0670) (0.0706) (0.0712) (0.0713)
Female -0.0831 -0.0830 -0.0157 -0.0002
(0.0113) (0.0113) (0.0207) (0.0210)
Experience 0.0419 0.0492 0.0444
(0.0032) (0.0037) (0.0038)
Experience ? Female -0.0153 -0.0098
(0.0039) (0.0041)
Age 0.0405 0.0150 0.0153 0.0163
(0.0016) (0.0026) (0.0026) (0.0027)
Years of Education 0.0196 0.0354 0.0351 0.0329
(0.0040) (0.0041) (0.0041) (0.0041)
AFQT Percentile 0.0024 0.0024 0.0025 0.0024
(0.0003) (0.0003) (0.0003) (0.0003)
Collective Bargaining 0.0786 0.0814 0.0794 0.0798
(0.0159) (0.0160) (0.0159) (0.0159)
Married 0.1034
(0.0167)
Married ? Female -0.0946
(0.0217)
Children (= 1 for 1+ child) -0.0499
(0.0153)
Sample Size 5,848 5,705 5,705 5,705
Standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is log hourly wage.
Sample includes white men and women who are observed transitioning
from one year of weak labor force attachment (LFA) to three
consecutive years of strong LFA, and who had completed at least one
year of college by the end of their first year of strong LFA. The
definition of strong LFA is provided in section 4.1. Sample includes
wages for the first three years following transition, and for any
subsequent year of strong LFA, up to 10 years following transition.
Table 4: Job Changes and Job Tenure
Variables Model 3 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7
Intercept 1.3911 1.5209 1.3634 1.4430
(0.0712) (0.1310) (0.0741) (0.1478)
Female -0.0157 0.2934 -0.0514 0.3317
(0.0207) (0.1316) (0.0292) (0.1639)
Experience 0.0492 0.0441 0.0389 0.0423
(0.0037) (0.0080) (0.0044) (0.0079)
Experience ? Female -0.0153 -0.0461 -0.0225 -0.0479
(0.0039) (0.0135) (0.0053) (0.0132)
Job Change -0.2633 -0.1516
(0.1416) (0.1765)
Job Change ? Female -0.6790 -0.7715
(0.2880) (0.3534)
Job Tenure 0.0008 0.0002
(0.0002) (0.0001)
(Job Tenure)2 (/10,000) -0.0093
(0.0036)
Job Tenure ? Female 0.0007 -0.0001
(0.0003) (0.0002)
(Job Tenure)2 ? Female (/10,000) -0.0089
(0.0055)
Age 0.0153 0.0076 0.0129 0.0071
(0.0026) (0.0035) (0.0027) (0.0035)
Years of Education 0.0351 0.0464 0.0392 0.0486
(0.0041) (0.0062) (0.0042) (0.0064)
AFQT Percentile 0.0025 0.0020 0.0023 0.0020
(0.0003) (0.0004) (0.0003) (0.0004)
Collective Bargaining 0.0794 0.0321 0.0647 0.0294
(0.0159) (0.0212) (0.0164) (0.0212)
Sample Size 5,705 5,217 5,184 5,184
Standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is log hourly wage. Sample
includes white men and women who are observed transitioning from one year
of weak labor force attachment (LFA) to three consecutive years of strong LFA,
and who had completed at least one year of college by the end of their first year
of strong LFA. The definition of strong LFA is provided in section 4.1. Sample
includes wages for the first three years following transition, and for any
subsequent year of strong LFA, up to 10 years following transition.
Table 5: Wage Growth and Job Changes
Variables Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 Model 11
Intercept 0.1509 0.0512 -0.1369 -0.1320
(0.0521) (0.0632) (0.1065) (0.1069)
Female -0.0042 -0.0100 -0.0034 -0.0170
(0.0063) (0.0063) (0.0074) (0.0267)
Hours of Work 0.0001 0.0002 0.0002
(0.0000) (0.0000) (0.0000)
(Hours of Work)2(/10,000) -0.0003 -0.0003 -0.0004
(0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0001)
Job Change 0.4265 0.3817
(0.1893) (0.2023)
Job Change ? Female 0.0782
(0.1465)
Age -0.0065 -0.0065 -0.0027 -0.0025
(0.0010) (0.0009) (0.0020) (0.0021)
Years of Education 0.0029 0.0046 0.0017 0.0011
(0.0022) (0.0022) (0.0028) (0.0030)
AFQT Percentile 0.0001 0.0001 0.0003 0.0003
(0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002)
Sample Size 4,887 4,887 4,282 4,282
Standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable is log hourly wage
growth. Sample includes white men and women who are observed
transitioning from one year of weak labor force attachment (LFA) to three
consecutive years of strong LFA, and who had completed at least one year
of college by the end of their first year of strong LFA. The definition of
strong LFA is provided in section 4.1. Sample includes wages for
the first three years following transition, and for any subsequent year of
strong LFA, up to 10 years following transition.

