  
 
? 2008 International Monetary Fund June 2008 
    IMF Country Report No. 08/184 
 
 
 
 
Namibia: Report on Observance of Standards and Codes? 
Fiscal Transparency Module 
 
 
This Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes on Fiscal Transparency for Namibia was 
prepared by a staff team of the International Monetary Fund as background documentation for the 
periodic consultation with the member country. It is based on the information available at the time it 
was completed on September 7, 2007. The views expressed in this document are those of the staff 
team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the government of Namibia or the Executive Board of 
the IMF. 
 
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents by the IMF allows for the deletion of 
market-sensitive information. 
 
 
 
Copies of this report are available to the public from 
 
International Monetary Fund ? Publication Services 
700 19th Street, N.W. ? Washington, D.C. 20431 
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 ? Telefax: (202) 623-7201 
E-mail: publications@imf.org ? Internet: http://www.imf.org 
 
Price: $18.00 a copy 
 
International Monetary Fund 
Washington, D.C. 
 
  
   
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND 
 
NAMIBIA 
 
Report on The Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) 
Fiscal Transparency Module 
 
Prepared by the Fiscal Affairs Department 
 
Approved by Abdoulaye Bio-Tchan? and Richard Hemming 
 
September 7, 2007 
 
  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Namibia has the essential elements of a transparent fiscal system and meets the basic 
standards of the fiscal transparency code. In recent years, the Government has improved 
the public financial management system, particularly the budget formulation process 
and the accounting system. Specific initiatives include the development and 
presentation of the budget underpinned by a comprehensive macroeconomic framework 
and Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF); implementation of an Integrated 
Financial Management System (IFMS); formulation of a comprehensive debt strategy 
combined by improved reporting on debt, contingent liabilities, and on-lending; and an 
assessment in the budget documents of macroeconomic risks, policy initiatives, and 
fiscal sustainability. The Government has reduced the backlog in external audit, and 
begun establishing internal audit in the line ministries and addressing audit problems of 
the tax administration. It has established an Anti-Corruption Commission to address, 
inter alia, corruption among public officials. 
The current momentum of fiscal policy and management reforms needs to be 
maintained. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) urgently needs to develop an appropriate 
budget classification structure by adopting a Program classification, and to improve the 
consistency of reporting on the budget to facilitate informed discussion of policies and 
the rationalization of spending. The Ministry should make publically available its 
quarterly information bulletin and should present a mid-year budget review to the 
Parliament. The fiscal data should cover general government, and there should be 
improved reporting on state-owned enterprises. Civil society should be involved more 
actively in the budget process and the budget calendar advanced so that the budget is 
presented to Parliament well in advance of the end of the fiscal year. The Government 
needs to significantly raise the capacity for external and internal audit of its own 
activities and the tax administration?s ability to audit taxpayers. It must firmly address 
proven instances of wrongdoing and ensure a proper structure is put in place for 
Government procurement and supervision of state-owned enterprises, and public banks, 
as well as subsidized enterprises. Resource revenue provisions are clear and transparent 
but there is scope to clarify the treatment of royalties and reduce discretion. 
 
2 
 Contents Page 
 
Abbreviations.............................................................................................................................3 
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................4 
II. Detailed Description of Practice ...........................................................................................4 
A. Clarity of Roles and Responsibilities........................................................................4 
B. Open Budget Preparation, Execution, and Reporting .............................................13 
C. Public Availability of Information ..........................................................................27 
D. Assurances of Integrity ...........................................................................................31 
III. IMF Staff Commentary......................................................................................................35 
 
Boxes 
1. The Budget Preparation Process ..........................................................................................17 
2.  Medium-Term Expenditure Framework and Medium-Term Plans ....................................18 
3. Integrated Financial Management System...........................................................................22 
 
Appendixes 
I. Resource Revenue Transparency: The Mining Sector .........................................................40 
II.  Summary Tables.................................................................................................................48 
 
Appendix Tables 
1. A Summary Assessment of Practices ..................................................................................48 
2. Public Availability of Information?A Summary ...............................................................52 
 
  
                                 3  
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AG  Auditor-General 
BON  Bank of Namibia 
CGA  Central Governance Agency 
EPZ  Export Processing Zones 
EPAS  Directorate of Economic Policy Advisory Services 
ESAAG Eastern and Southern African Accountants Group 
IFMS  Integrated Financial Management System 
GFSM  Government Finance Statistics Manual 
IPPR  Institute for Public Policy Research 
IPSAS  International Public Sector Accounting Standards 
IRD  Directorate of Inland Revenue 
MTEF  Medium-Term Expenditure Framework 
MTI  Ministry of Trade and Industry 
MOF    Ministry of Finance 
MME  Ministry of Mines and Energy 
NAMFISA Namibia Financial Institutions Supervisory Authority 
NEPRU Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit  
NDP  National Development Plan 
NPC  National Planning Commission 
NPCS  National Planning Commission Secretariat 
PAC  Public Accounts Committee 
PEMP  Performance Effectiveness Management Program 
OPM  Office of the Prime Minister 
ROSC  Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes 
SIDA  Swedish International Development Agency 
SOEGC  State-Owned Enterprise Governance Council 
TAW  Treasury Authorization Warrant 
VAT  Value Added Tax  
 
 
 
 4 
  
I.   INTRODUCTION1 
 
1.      This report provides an assessment of fiscal transparency practices in Namibia 
against the requirements of the IMF Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency. 
The assessment has two parts. The first part is a description of current practice, prepared by 
the IMF staff on the basis of discussions with the authorities and their responses to the fiscal 
transparency questionnaire, and drawing on other available information. The second part is 
an IMF staff commentary on fiscal transparency in Namibia. Code sections are listed in 
italics next to each heading. 
II.   DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF PRACTICE 
 
A.   Clarity of Roles and Responsibilities 
General government is generally well defined.                                                                 1.1.1  
2.      A comprehensive definition of the general government in Namibia, consistent 
with the definition in the Government Finance Statistics, would comprise the central 
government, 13 regional councils, local councils, and traditional authorities. The central 
government consists of the Offices of the President, the Prime Minister, and the Auditor-
General, the Parliament?s two chambers, Government Ministries, and various agencies, 
commissions, funds, and other statutory entities that are fully or mainly funded by the budget 
and perform public functions. The budgetary central government consists of the Office and 
Ministries and the National Planning, the Electoral, and the Anti-Corruption Commissions. 
The broader public sector would include a range of commercially oriented public 
corporations and state-owned enterprises, but the distinction between these types of 
enterprises is not always clear.   
The roles of the executive, legislative and judicial branches are clearly defined in the 
Constitution.                                                                                                                     1.1.2 
3.      Under the Constitution, the President is the Head of State and of the 
Government, and executive power rests in the President and Cabinet. The Cabinet 
consists of the President, the Prime Minister and other Ministers appointed by the President 
from the members of the National Assembly, one of two chambers of Parliament. Legislative 
power rests in the National Assembly with the power to pass laws with the assent of the 
President, subject, where applicable, to the powers and functions of the National Council, the 
second chamber of Parliament, which consists of two members from each region to be 
                                                 
1 The mission held discussions on fiscal transparency in Windhoek during June 5?19, 2006. The staff team, 
comprising Ms. Stotsky and Messrs. Khemani and Shukla, met with officials from the Ministry of Finance, the 
Bank of Namibia, the Auditor General?s Office, the Ministry of Mines and Energy, the Ministry of Regional 
and Local Government, Housing and Rural Development, the National Planning Commission, the National 
Statistics Office, the Central Governance Agency, and the Anti-Corruption Commission, as well as 
representatives from the private sector and nongovernmental research institutions. 
   5 
elected from among the members of the Regional Council in each region. The National 
Assembly has 72 elected members and up to 6 members appointed by the President. The 
judiciary power rests in the Courts of Namibia, which consist of a Supreme Court, a High 
Court, and Lower Courts. The Courts are independent and subject only to the Constitution 
and the law.   
The responsibilities of different levels of government are clearly defined.                    1.1.2   
4.      The central government plays an important role in the economy. Most revenue, 
spending, and other financial powers are allocated to the central government. Tax 
revenues are derived from income taxes, the value-added tax, excises, customs duties, and 
other smaller taxes. Nontax revenues include dividends from state-owned enterprises and the 
central bank. Revenues and grants were estimated at 30.4 percent of GDP in fiscal year 
2004/05. Spending covers the full range of activities normally carried out by a central 
government. Spending was estimated at 34.5 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2004/05.2  
5.      The regional and local councils play a relatively small fiscal role, although fiscal 
statistics on their revenues and spending are not readily available. Regional councils 
have not been assigned any specific service delivery functions. Their main role is to 
coordinate development planning in their territories, including rural settlement areas. Local 
councils are mainly responsible for the provision of utilities (including electricity, water, 
sewerage, cemeteries, and so on). Regional councils are mainly funded by central 
government appropriations, channeled through the Ministry of Regional and Local 
Government, Housing and Rural Development, by some small fees and charges, and by 
5 percent of ratable charges on immovable property levied by local councils. Local councils 
finance themselves by ratable charges on immovable property, fees, and charges for utilities 
provision. The Local Authorities Act 1993 (section 73) authorizes the local councils to 
determine the rates guided by a number of factors like land type, area, location and 
improvements to the land and properties.3 Regional and local councils have limited 
borrowing power, mainly bank loans, with the approval of the Minister of Finance; while 
there are no legal limits on their levels of debt. 
6.      The Decentralization Enabling Act, 2000 (Act 33 of 2000) envisions the eventual 
devolution of some of social services and infrastructure development to the regional 
level. However, this decentralization is taking place very gradually, starting with water 
provision and electricity distribution, and line ministries are still mainly responsible for the 
provision of public services in the regions and localities. 
The Bank of Namibia is the Central Bank of Namibia and serves as the State?s principal 
instrument for monetary policy administration and supervision of banking institutions.                    
                1.1.4 
                                                 
2 The fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31. 
3 A local authority council may also impose special rates in case of a deficit, with the prior approval of the 
Minister of Local Government and Housing. 
 6 
7.      The Bank of Namibia was established by section 2 of the Bank of Namibia Act, 
1990 (Act 8 of 1990) and is governed by the Bank of Namibia Act, 1997 (Act 15 of 1997). 
This act lays out the main objectives of the Bank to promote and maintain a sound monetary, 
credit and financial system in Namibia and sustain the liquidity, solvency and functioning of 
that system; to promote and maintain internal and external monetary stability and an efficient 
payments mechanism; to foster monetary, credit and financial conditions conducive to the 
orderly, balanced and sustained economic development of Namibia; to serve as the 
Government?s banker, financial advisor and fiscal agent; and to assist in the attainment of 
national economic goals. This act establishes a Board to be responsible for the policy and 
administration of the Bank, appointed by the President and headed by the Governor. The 
relationship between the Government and the Bank and the disposition of Bank profits are 
dealt with clearly in the law.  
8.      With regard to the Bank?s relationship with the Government, the Bank of 
Namibia Act stipulates that the Bank may grant loans to the Government on such terms 
and conditions as the Board and the Minister may agree upon, but all such loans shall 
be repaid to the Bank within six months of being granted. According to a Memorandum 
of Agreement between the Bank and the Government, the Government may without prior 
notification use an overdraft facility from the Bank that should not exceed N$200 million4. 
The interest rate charged on this facility is equal to the weighted average discount rate on the 
latest issue of 91 day treasury bills plus two percentage points. This interest differential 
makes it advantageous for the Government to borrow in the local financial market. Any 
overdraft in excess of N$200 million requires approval from the Board of the Bank. All 
foreign borrowing by the Government or other public entity must be approved by the 
Minister of Finance and done in consultation with the Bank. The Namibian Dollar is pegged 
to the South African Rand. 
The legal framework for management of general government public funds is clear.  1.2.1   
9.      The Constitution, Article 126, and the State Finance Act, 1991 (Act 13 of 1991) 
lay out the basic legal framework for the management of public funds in Namibia. The 
State Finance Act covers the central government and in particular refers to the establishment 
of the State Revenue Fund5 as the consolidated account of the central government.6 Both the 
Regional Councils Act, 1992 (Act 22 of 1992, amended in 2002) and the Local Authorities 
Act, 1992 (Act 23 of 1992 amended in 2002) provide the legal framework for management of 
public funds by regional and local councils.  
                                                 
4 The statutory limits on central bank overdrafts are observed in practice. 
5 In addition, the State Finance Act refers to the maintenance at the central bank an account to be known as the 
State Account for depositing all state moneys and making all payments. Apparently, the State Account is 
primarily the title of the main bank account at the central bank for state moneys.    
6 See Daniel Motinga, 2005, ?Namibia,? Budget Transparency and Participation 2, edited by Maritt Claassens 
and Albert Van Zyl (Cape Town, South Africa: IDASA), pp. 194?212. 
   7 
10.      The Ministry of Finance (MOF) plays the central role in fiscal policy making 
and management and for supervising the preparation of the budget. Under the Minister 
of Finance, there is a Deputy Minister, and a Permanent Secretary, who is reported to by a 
Deputy Permanent Secretary and a Director of Economic Policy Advisory Services and a 
Division of Internal Audit. Under the Deputy Permanent Secretary, there is a Department of 
State Accounts, a Department of Revenue Management, a Directorate of Administration, and 
a Division for Information Technology. Under the Department of State Accounts are 
Directorates for Expenditure and Financial Management; Budget Management and Control; 
and Asset, Cash, and Debt Management. Under the Department of Revenue Management, 
there is the Directorate of Inland Revenue and the Directorate of Customs and Excise. The 
term ?Treasury? refers to the general financial management function of the Ministry of 
Finance.  
11.      The State Finance Act provides the Government with the authority to regulate 
receipt and make payments regarding the use of public funds. It also provides for the role 
of the Treasury in overseeing the use of state funds. Article 127 of the Constitution provides 
for establishment of the office of the Auditor-General and states that the Auditor-General 
shall audit the State Revenue Fund and report on this to the National Assembly. The State 
Finance Act further spells out these duties.  
12.      The National Planning Commission Act, 1994 (Act 15 of 1994) lays out the role 
for the National Planning Commission, which is in the Office of the President and 
headed by a Director-General. It is responsible for preparing the development budget for 
submission to the Ministry of Finance as part of the budget process and for coordination with 
external donors. The National Planning Commission (NPC) is also responsible for the 
production and and compilation of national statistics, as well as maintenance and 
administration of the national statistical system. 
13.      There are also a number of donor funds, given by external bilateral and 
multilateral institutions, which on the request of the donors are kept outside the State 
Revenue Fund. However, the National Planning Commission, in conjunction with the 
Ministry of Finance and line ministries, is responsible for ensuring that these funds serve 
agreed developmental purposes and they are taken into account in the overall budget 
formulation. The authorities indicated that they have encouraged donors to channel external 
aid and loans through the State Revenue Fund to improve their ability to allocate state 
resources to the highest priority development purposes. 
The relationship between the central government and the state-owned enterprises and 
other statutory bodies varies and roles and responsibilities lack some clarity.           1.1.4  
14.      The state-owned enterprises are supervised by the State-Owned Enterprise 
Governance Council (SOEGC), a committee of Cabinet.7  8 This Council works in 
                                                 
7 A state-owned enterprise is defined as a) a body corporate established under any Act other than the Companies 
Act (excluding local or regional authorities) and b) a company registered under the Companies Act; in which 
the government controls the composition of the board of directors, controls more than 50 percent of the votes, 
and controls more than 50 percent of the issued shares. 
   8 
consultation with the relevant portfolio ministers, and with the advice of the Central 
Governance Agency (CGA), which was created by Cabinet decision for this purpose. State-
owned enterprises accounts are kept off budget, but may receive budget support through 
lending and equity participation of subsidies. Some extra-budgetary institutions are funded 
directly through the budget, including educational institutions and the Namibia Broadcasting 
Corporation. The budget submission may include separate reporting, by relevant ministry, on 
some of these entities. 
Public financial corporations  
15.      The Government has a full equity share of four specialist or policy banking 
corporations: (i) the Development Bank of Namibia, which extends credit at below market 
interest rates for specified development projects and for which the Government is seeking to 
expand its capital, including by tapping foreign investors; (ii) the Agricultural Bank of 
Namibia, which extends credit to farmers under special schemes to assist communal farmers 
in communal areas and to resettle communal farmers on commercial land under the 
government?s affirmative action loan scheme; (iii) the National Housing Enterprise, which 
extends credit at below market interest to fund low-cost housing projects; and (iv) the 
NamPost Savings Bank, which is a deposit institution that is part of Namibia Post Limited. 
The first two banking institutions, which are the largest in capitalization of the public banks, 
are supervised by the Ministry of Finance and the State-Owned Enterprise Governance 
Council. Altogether, the equity of these four public banks is estimated to amount to less than 
10 percent of banking system assets. With regard to nonbanking financial institutions, the 
Government has a full equity share in an insurance company, the Namibia Reinsurance 
Company, which is supervised by the Ministry of Finance and the Namibia Financial 
Institutions Supervisory Authority (NAMFISA). In view of the potential risks to the budget 
of lending activities by the public banks, it is important that these banks be supervised in the 
same manner as other banks and thus brought under the supervision of the Bank of Namibia. 
Already, the Agricultural Bank of Namibia has been facing financial difficulties and has had 
to curtail its lending activities. 
Other statutory enterprises  
16.      There are a large number of public nonfinancial corporations, in which 
Government has a part or full ownership share, including public utilities and Air 
Namibia, the national airline. In addition, there are a number of other statutory bodies that 
are not incorporated, serving a range of purposes.  
Special funds 
17.      There are a number of statutorily and nonstatutorily created funds of the central 
government. The statutorily created funds include the National Energy Fund, under the 
Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME), which derives its revenue mainly from fuel levies on 
                                                                                                                                                       
8 This Council consists of the Prime Minister, as chair, the Finance Minister, the Trade and Industry Minister, 
the Attorney-General, and the Director-General of the National Planning Commission. 
   9 
importers. It is responsible for stabilizing the price of fuel, and pays subsidies to producers to 
cover their losses from below market prices. This fund has accumulated some sizable losses 
in the past few years because retail prices were held below market levels. Another one of the 
largest funds is the Road Fund Administration,9 under the Ministry of Works, which mainly 
funds itself with a special levy on fuel and the receipt of foreign funds, for road building 
projects. Similarly, there are also two diamond-related funds, namely the Diamond Valuation 
Fund and the Diamond Port Fund. 
18.      There are two important funds for social security and pensions for government 
employees. The Social Security Fund, supervised by the Social Security Commission, under 
the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare, finances maternity and death benefits through a 
0.9 percent tax on payroll (limited to a N$27 per month contribution per employee). The 
Government Institutions Pension Fund (GIPF), established in 1989, is the pension fund for 
public employees. It provides a defined benefit pension and insurance benefits to public 
employees, financed by participating parts of the Government (16 percent of pensionable 
salary) and employee contributions (7 percent of pensionable salary). It is believed to be the 
first government services pension fund to have been successfully privatized and is subject to 
the same laws as all private sector pension funds, though the Government retains a strong 
oversight role. It is controlled by a Board of Trustees, which contains representatives of the 
Government, employees and labor unions. It is fully funded and although the trustees are 
responsible for overall operation of the fund, they have appointed a number of private 
managers of the assets of the fund.  
19.      In addition to the statutory entities, the Government owns an equity interest in a 
number of private sector enterprises, including NAMDEB, the largest diamond mining 
company (owned in partnership with DeBeers Diamonds), where it has a fifty per cent 
equity share and a few other mineral producers, such as Rossing Uranium. 
Reform of the sector 
20.      Reforming the state-owned enterprise sector is one priority of the Government, 
though the progress has been slow. A bill, the State-Owned Enterprises Bill, 2005 (Bill 17 
of 2005), now awaiting the final approval of Parliament, would strengthen the existing 
legislative framework for control of these enterprises by requiring a performance agreement 
between the relevant portfolio minister and the enterprise, and by enhancing the powers of 
the state to investigate the activities of these enterprises. In addition, it would improve 
reporting from these enterprises, with the intention, to be spelled out in regulations, of 
requiring each enterprise to submit a quarterly statement of accounts and an annual budget 
plan for inclusion in the annual budget submission. It would dissolve the Central Governance 
Agency and shift its responsibilities to a Secretariat of the Governance Council. The bill 
leaves intact the predominant role of portfolio ministers in appointing members of the Boards 
of these enterprises and does not fully clarify the role of the various institutions of 
                                                 
9 The Road Fund is managed through three institutions, namely, the Road Fund Administration, the Road 
Construction Company, and the Road Authority.  
   10 
Government in supervising the state-owned enterprises and ensure a strong enough role for 
the Council and Ministry of Finance. This bill should strengthen the role of the Council and 
Minister of Finance in determining the members of the Boards of state enterprises and ensure 
that the Council and Minister have the ability to effect improvements in governance and the 
economic performance of these enterprises. 
The legal framework for privatization is not fully developed.                                       1.1.5 
21.      Full scale privatization of any of the state owned enterprises is unlikely in the 
near future and at present there is no comprehensive legislative framework for 
privatization. Minority stakes in state-owned enterprises may be sold. Although a few such 
stakes have already been sold, the policy framework governing this process is not fully 
developed but in principle follows the Government?s tender process, discussed later. 
Public land is redistributed according to the law, though there are some concerns. 1.1.5 
22.      An important public asset is land. Since the mid 1990s, the Government has relied 
on a ?willing buyer, willing seller? program to address the inequalities in land distribution 
stemming from the colonial era in which much of the land was owned by a small number of 
farmers. The program is complemented by a concessional affirmative action loan scheme for 
the purchase and modernization of farms. The pace of implementation of the program of land 
redistribution has been slow, which has been attributed to cumbersome decision-making and 
bureaucratic procedures and the reluctance of farmers to sell their land at prices acceptable to 
the Government. Land acquisition through expropriation is envisaged under the Constitution 
?in the public interest? and the Government has initiated expropriations with compensation 
with respect to 20 farms, two of which have already taken place. There are some concerns 
that the criteria to identify land subject to expropriation may not be objective and transparent. 
The authorities feel that the existing legal framework is sufficiently transparent, noting that 
an independent technical land committee has authority to assess land offered for sale in terms 
of its value and potential usefulness to resettlement, according to transparent criteria, and that 
recourse to the court system would provide sufficient protection against arbitrary decisions.  
Laws and processes governing government regulation of the private sector are clear 
and open but concerns were expressed at times about implementation.             1.1.5 
23.      The private economy of Namibia is based primarily on primary mineral 
extraction industries (including diamonds, zinc, and uranium), farming and ranching, 
and financial services. In the mission?s discussions with civil society, including private 
individuals, representatives of industry associations, and nongovernmental think tanks, the 
laws and regulatory framework for private sector activity were seen as conducive to private 
business development and the Government as relatively transparent in its interactions with 
the private sector. The main concern was what a number of commentators perceived to be 
some slackening of the interest by public officials in recent years in soliciting the views of 
the private sector. Some concerns were also expressed about what was seen at times as a lack 
of implementation capacity in Government, cumbersome bureaucratic procedures guided too 
heavily by social or political rather than economic objectives, deals given on the basis of 
   11 
insider relationships, and the Government?s unwillingness to hold public officials 
accountable for proven instances of wrong doing.   
The legislative basis for taxation is clear and comprehensive but regulations for 
implementation of some parts of the laws are lacking.                                                   1.2.2 
24.      Namibia does not have a consolidated tax code but has promulgated a series of 
tax laws on income and consumption. The income taxes are administered according to the 
provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1981 (Act 24 of 1981), which has been subsequently 
amended several times. The Minerals Act, 1992 (Act 33 of 1992) and Diamond Act, 1999 
(Act 13 of 1999) relating to the mining sector are the two other significant tax laws. The 
value added tax (VAT) was introduced in year 2000, under the Value Added Tax Act, 2000 
(Act 10 of 2000), and amended in 2002 and 2004. The Act makes provisions for the Minister 
of Finance to issue regulations should they be needed. Income taxes and the VAT are 
administered by the Directorate of Inland Revenue under the Ministry of Finance. Customs 
duties and excises are administered by the Directorate of Customs and Excises. 
25.      When the VAT was introduced in 2000, there was a widespread campaign to 
inform and educate the population through workshops for stakeholders, press briefing, and 
so on. For amendments to the existing legislation, stakeholders are consulted during the 
process of amendment. When proposed tax legislation is submitted to Parliament, it may be 
referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Economics. It is the normal practice for 
the National Council to go to the regions and hold public hearings to gain feedback from the 
public on specific proposals.  
Tax exemptions and zero rating are defined in the tax laws.                                     1.2.2 
 
26.      Tax exempt income has been clearly defined in the law. Tax exempt institutions 
and other special entities have also been fully described. Similarly, rebates for certain type of 
income are outlined in detail and there is little scope of ambiguity or discretion in these 
cases. Substantial non-tax incentives, however, are often negotiated on a discretionary basis 
with individual investors. Special provisions affecting non-residents have been made in the 
act. Again, separate provisions have been made for taxation of mining operations including 
oil and gas extraction.  
27.      Tax exempt items under the VAT are also clearly defined in the law and are not 
left to the discretion of the tax administration or Ministry of Finance. Sometimes, 
particular organizations, transactions and events are given special treatment but that also has 
been clearly laid down in the law.   
28.      Refund of VAT may result from the sale of zero-rated goods, as defined in the 
VAT law, and from an excess of tax on inputs relative to tax on outputs. The refund used 
to be given in about a month?s time. By a recent directive of the Minister of Finance, all 
refunds of more than N$15,000 are subject to pre-audit, which normally takes three to four 
months. No interest is paid to the company for the audit period. An interest rate of 11 percent 
is payable from the date when a decision has been given after the completion of the audit 
process.  
   12 
29.      Certain tax incentives are available. Some incentives are available to specific 
sectors or types of producers or for exports. These are clearly laid down in the respective tax 
laws. The first point of application under the incentive scheme is the Ministry of Trade and 
Industry (MTI). Final approval is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, based on the 
recommendations of the ?incentives committee? chaired by IRD. Beneficiary operations are 
subsequently monitored and evaluated by IRD and MTI. Three sectors that get favorable tax 
treatment are manufacturing, farming and mining sectors. Some enterprises qualify for 
Export Processing Zones (EPZs) and are granted exemption from customs duty, VAT and 
corporate income taxes. These enterprises are subject only to the normal personal income 
taxes on the employees in EPZs. The criteria for granting status in EPZs should be clear and 
transparent. It is important to monitor actively enterprises qualifying for this favorable 
treatment. A prevalence of EPZs has in many countries undermined compliance because of 
the difficulty in properly limiting the tax benefits to those granted under the law and 
monitoring compliance, hence undermining overall tax compliance. 
30.      Discretionary powers for deferment of tax liability are provided for in the law 
and vested in the officers of Ministry of Finance and tax and customs administrations. 
This type of relief is not commonly granted for domestic VAT because the trader has already 
collected the taxes from consumers. Such requests are generally received in case of income 
taxes when the taxpayer, an individual or a company, may be facing a cash flow problem. 
For such deferrals, different levels of officers have the power to grant relief. Most of the 
cases are disposed of at the regional office levels and very few cases come to the 
headquarters. This whole process is formal and the relief is granted through official 
notice/letter. Because of privacy concerns, such orders are not made public.  
Taxpayer rights are well protected in the law.                                                                 1.2.2 
 
31.      The Income Tax law provides for objections and appeals by taxpayers. Similar 
provisions have been made in the VAT. Taxpayers have access to an independent judiciary 
and have the legal right to independent representation in their dealings with the 
administration. A taxpayer may lodge a written objection to an assessment or decision of the 
department within 90 days of receiving a notice. In terms of the VAT, the Commissioner 
may consider an objection to an assessment only if the assessed person has paid the tax due 
or if he or she has provided sufficient security of the unpaid tax. If the objection is rejected, 
the taxpayer may lodge an appeal to a Special Court within 30 days. The taxpayer has also 
the option to take income tax cases before a tax tribunal. 
32.      A mechanism exists for requesting advance tax liability rulings on particular 
transactions. Such rulings are sent to the applicant by private correspondence. Once such a 
ruling is issued, it offers a safe haven to the taxpayer with regard to the transaction as long as 
the taxpayer undertakes it in accordance with the ruling. 
33.      Income tax returns are annually mailed to the taxpayers but these are not 
accompanied by detailed instructions for completing and submitting the forms. These 
tax forms or instructions are not posted on the department?s website as well. Between the end 
of tax year and the date of submission of the tax return, a tax collection and taxpayer 
information program is launched by regional tax offices. However, the emphasis in these 
   13 
campaigns is more on achieving tax collection targets. Each regional office has a customer 
service unit to help taxpayers if they have questions on their tax situation.  
34.      Self-assessment in income taxation has not been introduced in the real sense. 
Taxpayers are expected to complete tax forms and calculate their tax liability according to 
the provisions of the law. Once these forms are received, the Directorate of Inland Revenue 
conducts a 100 percent examination of those tax returns and determines the final tax liability 
for each taxpayer. This naturally takes time and increases the Directorate of Inland 
Revenue?s workload considerably. It is forced to employ the bulk of its manpower and 
resources to routine tax assessment, payment, and record keeping. The Directorate is also 
unable to focus on large taxpayers due to its preoccupation with 100 percent tax assessment.  
B.   Open Budget Preparation, Execution, and Reporting 
A statement on fiscal policy objectives is included in the budget document, and fiscal 
sustainability issues are discussed.                                                                            3.1.1, 3.2.2 
35.      The overall national development goals of Namibia are outlined in Vision 2030, 
the longer term plan of the Government to transform Namibia into a higher income 
country and reduce income, regional, and gender inequalities. The national development 
goals are further defined in the National Development Plans (NDPs), five-year plans, which 
preceded but now reflect Vision 2030. The Government has completed review of its second 
five-year National Development Plan and anticipates starting its third five-year plan in fiscal 
year 2008/09. These goals guide the fiscal and other economic policies of the Government. 
36.      In 2001, the Minister of Finance introduced the Medium-Term Expenditure 
Framework (MTEF) as a central tool for budget planning and to enhance the 
transparency of the budgetary process. It covers a three-year rolling period. It is linked to 
the Performance Effectiveness Management Program (PEMP), which is a joint product of the 
Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Finance, and the National Planning 
Commission. It contains targets the ministries are expected to meet and is designed to focus 
on achieving specific program results.      
37.      The standard annual budget submission of the central government consists of 
five documents: the Statement for the Budget, the Macro-Economic and Budgetary 
Framework, the MTEF, the Estimates of Revenues and Expenditures, and the Three-Year 
Rolling Development Budget.10 The budget speech, given by the Minister of Finance, when 
presenting the budget to Parliament, as well as the analysis and explanations in the Macro-
Economic Framework and MTEF are the main means by which the short, medium, and long-
term fiscal objectives embodied in the Government?s plans are presented to policy makers 
and the public.   
                                                 
10 Ministry of Finance, various years, Statement for the Budget; Ministry of Finance, various years, Macro-
Economic and Budgetary Framework; Ministry of Finance, various years, Medium-Term Expenditure 
Framework; the Ministry of Finance, various years, Estimates of Revenues and Expenditures; and the National 
Planning Commission, various years, Three-Year Rolling Development Budget.  
   14 
38.      Fiscal risks in the budget documents are dealt with mainly through a discussion 
of trends and evolution of the public debt stock and loan guarantees. Although the 
documents contain medium-term projections (either two or three years), they do not present 
any longer term fiscal projections. Fiscal sustainability concerns are described as motivating 
certain fiscal policies and are discussed in the budget speech, with reference to the evolution 
of the debt to GDP ratio, assessments focused on the level of primary balance that is required 
to stay under a debt ceiling, and so on, but some additional quantitative analysis would 
enhance clarity.  
There are no legislated fiscal rules used in the budget process; however, the 
Government has three fiscal targets.                                                                                   3.1.2 
39.      The Government has set a long run fiscal target of limiting the ratio of 
government debt to GDP to no more than 25 percent. In recent years, the debt share has 
risen above this target. The Government has now put in place a medium-term fiscal plan, 
through the MTEF, that entails fiscal consolidation, though the public debt is projected to 
decline only to 32.4 percent of GDP by 2008/09. In addition, the Government has set targets, 
over the MTEF period, that the budget deficit should not exceed 3 percent of GDP and that 
public expenditure should not exceed 30 percent. 
Budget forecasts are clearly presented but the assumptions underlying the budget 
forecast are not clearly spelled out in the fiscal documentation.                                    3.1.3 
40.      The Ministry of Finance, in coordination with the Bank of Namibia (BON) and 
the National Planning Commission, is responsible for drawing up the macro-economic 
framework underlying the budget. The National Planning Commission Secretariat (NPCS) 
is responsible for the detailed macroeconomic modeling of the economy. This activity is 
further coordinated and advanced by the Macroeconomic Working Group, a technical think 
tank of the MOF, NPCS and BON. The Bank of Namibia has developed two macroeconomic 
models of the economy, one of which (NAMMAC) forms the basis for the discussion on the 
macroeconomic framework, relying on relationships between such key variables as the GDP 
growth rate, interest rates, exchange rates, and inflation, as well as macroeconomic 
aggregates such as savings and investment and foreign trade.   
41.      The National Planning Commission Secretariat provides the medium-term 
macroeconomic framework for the budget and the fiscal projections, which are 
presented in the MOF?s annual publication, Macro-Economic and Budgetary Framework. 
This examines trends in the economy and fiscal developments, and provides historical 
developments looking backward three years, and forecast for the budget for the coming and 
three subsequent fiscal years. The forecast is based on a no policy change scenario but 
expected changes are incorporated into the forecast. Since the forecast precedes the formal 
submission of the budget by roughly one-half year, no specific explanation of their influence 
on the forecast is given in this document. 
   15 
The annual budget preparation procedures are clear, but need to be enhanced in line 
with international best practices.                                                                                    3.1.3 
42.      The annual budget process is to a large extent open and starts with the 
formulation of an aggregated macro-economic framework. The approved framework is 
used by the Ministry of Finance to allocate resources, determine budget ceilings, and draw up 
budgetary guidelines to be sent to line ministries for preparing their draft budgets. An 
important drawback is that the budget process is fragmented into a number of different 
budgets?the operational (recurrent) budget, the development budget, and the budgets of a 
large number of special accounts, extrabudgetary funds, and other entities. This 
fragmentation of budget process obscures a consolidated picture of the public finances, and 
this could lead to sub-optimal decision making and insufficient fiscal discipline, as well as an 
inability to obtain information necessary to evaluate the performance of government sector as 
a whole. 
43.      There should be consultation with the private sector and nongovernmental 
organizations early on in the budget process and on fiscal issues, more generally. In the 
past, at the time of introduction of major tax laws or major amendments in the existing law, 
stakeholder representatives, research institutes, think tanks, and accounting firms were also 
involved, but that practice has gradually stopped. The President?s office had constituted an 
Economic Advisory Committee for the sake of consultation on economic and public finance 
issues, but this committee has been dormant for the past few years. It is, however, being 
revised at the instance of the current President.  
44.      The main steps in the annual budget preparation process are listed in Box 1 
below. The annual budget preparation process, including the budget calendar for compilation 
of operational and development budgets, is almost the same, though the operational budget is 
compiled by the Ministry of Finance and the development budget by the National Planning 
Commission. The final responsibility to put all budget documents together for presentation to 
the National Assembly rests with the Ministry of Finance. The coordination between the two 
budgets is achieved through the macro-economic framework, which guides the allocation of 
resources and determination of aggregate budgetary ceilings for both operational and 
development budgets. Also there is a participation of the Ministry of Finance budget officials 
in the development budget hearings conducted by the National Planning Commission. 
Although it would likely enhance the effectiveness of the budgetary process if the 
development budget responsibility was shifted to the Ministry of Finance, as long as there is 
good coordination in the achievement of the spending objectives of the government than 
maintaining the development budget in the National Planning Commission does not preclude 
effective budgeting. 
The budget is prepared and presented in the context of a three-year rolling MTEF.  3.1.3 
 
45.      The Government initiated a strategic budget process with fiscal year 2001/02 
when it introduced the MTEF covering that fiscal year and two subsequent fiscal years. 
The MTEF sets out the macro-fiscal framework for the coming three years, reviews fiscal 
   16 
policy objectives, and provides expenditure ceilings for the recurrent and development 
budgets, classified by Vote.11 To support the MTEF process, the Government introduced 
Medium-Term Plans (MTPs) for each Vote beginning with fiscal year 2003/04 and 
Accountability Reports for each vote prior to allocation announced in 2005. The MTPs 
establish objectives for each Vote, priorities for the MTEF period, and the categorization of 
the Vote?s budget by Program. These MTPs are included in the MTEF document. The 
strategic budgeting process using the MTEF and MTPs is still in its early stages (Box 2).
                                                 
11 Each ministry, office, and commission included in the State Revenue Fund is a Vote, except one ministry, 
which is split into two separate Votes. 
 17 
Box 1. The Budget Preparation Process 
 
The fiscal year begins on April 1 of a year and ends on March 31 of the following year,  
according to the State Finance Act, 1991. 
The main steps in the process are laid out in a circular issued 
 by the Ministry of Finance every year as follows: 
 
Due dates Activities Legal basis 
March?June Macro-economic framework 
Prepare macro-economic framework  
Budget 
circular 
July?August  Determine resource envelope/obtain budget information 
Presentation of macro-economic framework to the Cabinet for 
endorsement of fiscal targets.   
 
Issue circular to line ministries and agencies: (i) requesting estimates of 
tax and non-tax revenue; and grants/donations in cash form both for the 
medium term and the current financial year (revised), submission by 
mid-August and (ii) requesting expenditure estimates in the Ministry of 
Finance prescribed forms for the budget year and following two years, 
submission by end-August.  
Budget 
circular 
September?
November 
Determine Budget Ceilings 
 
Budget hearings-review all budget requests for the budget hearings. 
Analyze, review and compile additional requests from ministries and 
agencies. Issue invitations for budget hearings. Conduct budget hearings 
and develop ceilings. 
 
Compile final budget scenario based on macro-economic framework, 
fiscal targets, resource envelope, statutory payments, and budget 
hearings. 
 
Present summarized budgetary framework and medium-term 
expenditure framework to Treasury Cabinet Committee for approval. 
 
Submit summarized budgetary framework and Medium Term 
Expenditure Framework to Cabinet for approval. 
 
Issue Treasury circular to line ministries and agencies with final 
medium-term budget ceilings and seek adjusted documents.  
Budget 
circular 
November?
February of the 
following year 
Finalize budget documents  
Compile budget documents, seek comments of the Bank of Namibia and 
the National Planning Commission, and finalize. 
Budget 
circular 
Feb. ?March 
 
Submission of budget to Parliament for approval 
Print budget documents and submit budget to National Assembly and 
National Council  
 
With approval of the budget by both chambers of Parliament, an 
Appropriations Act is passed by the legislature, and given to the 
President for signature. 
State Finance 
Act, 1991 
 
 
 
   18 
 
Box 2. Medium Term Expenditure Framework and Medium-Term Plans 
 
In 1996, Government decided to reform the budget system in Namibia with the main aim of implementing a full 
fledged performance budgeting system. Since then a number of significant reforms have been introduced to the 
budget process. These include the PEMP introduced in 1999, and at the start of the financial year 2001/02, the 
MTEF. Simultaneously, the two types of budgets?the operational and development budget?continue to be 
prepared and published.  
 
The MTEF has the following key characteristics: 
 
? It sets out the macro-fiscal framework for the coming three years, reviews government fiscal policy 
objectives, and provides expenditure ceilings for the operational and development budgets by Vote. 
? The allocation of resources and expenditure priorities are set in line with Namibia?s Vision 2030, and 
National Development Plans. 
? The MTEF is supported by MTPs prepared for each Vote. The MTPs set out, for each Vote, the total 
resources allocated to each Program, the main activities to be carried out under each Program, and how 
the Programs will help to achieve the ministries? objectives which contribute to the overall national 
development objectives. The expenditure plans are linked to socioeconomic variables in the PEMP. 
? The MTEF covers a period of three years, but is revised every year. It thus serves the purpose of three-
year rolling budget and also an annual budget. The Votes also include statements on financial 
operations of some special funds and state-owned enterprises falling under the respective ministry.   
? The MTEF is regarded as the main budget document, and detailed information on the budget estimates 
is presented in the accompanying books?Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure and the Three-Year 
Rolling Development Budget. 
 The MTEF in Namibia, in principle, could offer several major advantages: 
? Its medium-term perspective enables a rationalization and improvement in the sectoral and intra-sector 
allocation of resources in terms of Government priorities.  
? The MTEF expands the budget coverage by including donor and other extra-budgetary funds. 
? It integrates the operational and development budgets and relates recurrent costs to capital expenditure. 
? It puts increased emphasis on performance as programs are expected to be planned and costed with a 
view to produce outputs that in turn should achieve objectives. 
In practice, the MTEF process is still in its early stages and falls short of its potential as a tool for rational 
allocation of resources, review of priorities, and decision making. In particular: 
? While the MTEF is presented by Vote Programs (through the MTPs), the detailed budget estimates for 
each Vote continue to be shown by Divisions and Sub-divisions (economic items). The expenditures 
are classified and recorded by Divisions and Sub-divisions alone. Thus, there is as yet no explicit link 
shown between the Vote-level Programs in the MTEFs and Votes, Divisions and Sub-divisions, and 
thus the report on the budget implementation through the Appropriation Accounts and the Audit 
Report. Hence it is not possible to compare what was supposed to have been spent on programs with 
what was actually spent. 
 
   19 
Box 2.  Medium-Term Expenditure Framework and Medium-Term Plans (concludes) 
? The MTEF process is currently largely top-down, concentrating on the aggregate expenditure amounts. 
The bottom process for feeding back into the MTEF ceilings is limited; this also hampers the 
Government?s ability to use the budget as a strategic tool for achievement of its development goals.  
? Expenditure allocations still seem to follow an incremental basis; estimates for the two out years do not 
reflect reprioritization or genuine costing of programs, but seem to be derived by applying uniform 
growth factors. 
? The recurrent and development budget process would benefit from some better integration, and the 
coverage of donor funds remains incomplete. 
? The accounting system can not report on Programs, and PEMP indicators are not well integrated into 
the planning process. There is little scope for monitoring performance against budget targets.   
 
Estimates of new initiatives and ongoing costs of government policies are not clearly 
distinguished in the budget documents.                                                                            3.1.4 
46.      The formal budget presentation, in the MTEF, does not provide details on the 
costs of new initiatives on the spending side or the revenues from new initiatives on the 
revenue side. One clear shortcoming of the transparency of information provided in the 
budget is that there is no clear connection between initiatives announced in the budget and 
their fiscal implications. 
47.      The various aspects of major tax laws are not examined in the budget or other 
public documents on an annual basis. An overall review of the tax policy objectives is, 
however, presented at the time of the annual budget in the context of debt situation, revenues 
and expenditures trends, economic growth and poverty alleviation programs. New tax laws, 
tax amendments for expansion of existing tax base, changes in tax rates etc. are brought in 
before the Parliament as separate acts of legislation as and when deemed necessary. 
However, there is no formal reporting on tax expenditures in budget documents. 
The sensitivity of budget estimates to changes in economic variables is assessed and 
fiscal risks are discussed with the budget.                                                                      3.1.5   
48.      In general, the sensitivity of the budget estimates to changes in economic variables 
and fiscal risks is assessed in the budget speech and macroeconomic framework. The formal 
analysis of fiscal risks examines the effect of variation in key forecasting assumptions, the 
level of guarantees and trends, any litigation against the Government that could have 
budgetary impact, and uncertainty regarding the size of specific expenditure commitments. 
As with sustainability issues, some more quantification would enhance clarity. Information 
on government guarantees is provided in the MTEF and the quarterly bulletin and annual 
   20 
reports of the Bank of Namibia12 but there is no assessment of the likelihood that these 
guarantees will need to be assumed by the budget in the documentation.  
The MTEF program classification is not incorporated into the budget classification and 
chart of accounts and thus is not incorporated into budget execution reports.           3.2.1 
49.      As explained in Box 2 on the MTEF, the budget classification and chart of 
accounts do not include a program classification. The budget classification structure used 
in the Budget Estimates document has three segments, namely Vote, Divisions and Sub-
divisions (economic/line item classification), where as the MTEF document classification has 
two segments, namely Vote and Programs; and below programs there is no economic 
classification. The Programs are not linked in any manner with the Divisions and Sub-
divisions.  
50.      The chart of accounts used by the accounting system, namely the Integrated 
Financial Management System (IFMS), includes Vote, Division, and Sub-divisions alone 
and does not cover Programs in any manner. As a result, expenditures are not classified in 
terms of Programs and no expenditure data are available for Programs. There is an urgent 
need to review and revise the budget classification structure and the chart of accounts, and 
incorporate the program classification. Also, the economic (Sub-division) classification, 
which primarily follows Government Finance Statistics Manual (GFSM) 1986 standards, 
needs to be reviewed and improved in line with the GFSM 2001 classification.           
The overall balance of the central government is the main indicator of the fiscal 
position, and this balance is monitored during the year.                                        3.2.3, 3.2.4 
51.      The overall balance in the State Revenue Fund is the main indicator of the fiscal 
position and is monitored carefully over the fiscal year. The State Revenue Fund should 
in principle comprise all the activities of central government, but in practices it does not 
include some revenues and expenditures of extrabudgetary funds and statutory enterprises 
that are performing government functions and are predominantly funded by the budget, and 
donor funds13 that are channeled outside the budget. It is unclear how much of a difference 
the inclusion of these additional components of the central government would make in the 
overall balance and the Government should strive to construct this balance on a regular 
balance. Other fiscal indicators may be calculated for specific purposes but not on a regular 
basis. No attempt is made to calculate a balance which encompasses the broader public sector 
or general government, including subnational government. 
Basic accounting and internal control procedures are in place and the new accounting 
system will require some additional time to become well established.                          3.3.1  
                                                 
12 Bank of Namibia, various dates, Quarterly Bulletin and Annual Report. 
13 The Development Budget contains some (but not all) externally financed project expenditures. Non-inclusion 
of donor financed capital projects is of the order of 0.5 percent of GDP, and is thus a significant problem. 
   21 
52.      The accounting system and internal control procedures are regulated by the 
State Finance Act and the Treasury Instructions issued thereunder. In addition, the 
Treasury has issued several instructions to strengthen maintenance of commitment control 
records to control over-commitments and payment arrears. The internal control system is 
sound, with control established through strong centralization of the payment system. The 
treasury system is centralized at the Ministry of Finance, and line ministries are not allowed 
to hold bank accounts for their operations, so the treasury system should encompass the 
financial activities of the central government. The Treasury operates a single bank account 
called the ?State Revenue Fund? with three sub-accounts at the Bank of Namibia for revenue 
collections, whose balances are transferred to the main account at the end of every day. 
Salaries are paid centrally from the Ministry of Finance through bank transfers, checks, or 
cash. Authority to undertake other expenditures (recurrent and development) is given to line 
ministries by the Treasury based on monthly Treasury Authorization Warrants (TAWs), with 
payments made by the Ministry of Finance.  
53.      The recent introduction of an IFMS is expected to address the problems faced 
earlier, primarily the lack of real-time financial information, and thus the timeliness and 
regularity of data reconciliation, and the weak capacity to use the information for active 
financial management. The IFMS has recently been rolled out to all ministries and 
departments, but it will take some time to get the system well established and to exploit its 
full potential (Box 3). 
The IFMS is capable of producing accurate in-year reports on the central government?s 
budget outturn.                                                                                                                                          3.3.1 
54.      The recently implemented IFMS can generate accurate and timely in-year 
reports including monthly fiscal reports and reports on outstanding payment 
obligations. However, it is necessary to design the format of all these reports in the reporting 
functionality of the IFMS. The chart of accounts is consistent with the budget classification 
(divisions and sub-divisions) included in the detailed budget estimates of revenue and 
expenditure; however it does not include the MTEF Program classification and can not 
therefore produce budget outturn data in terms of Programs. As stated earlier, the chart of 
accounts needs to be reviewed and developed further; hopefully the IFMS would have no 
problem in using the revised and improved economic classification in line with the GFSM 
2001. 
The Treasury?s accounting and reporting system fully accounts for all transactions 
pertaining to the approved budget of the State Revenue Fund.                            3.3.1, 2.1.1   
55.      The Treasury?s accounting and reporting system fully accounts for all 
transactions of the State Revenue Fund. However, the central accounting system does not 
fully capture off-budget activities, nor consolidate the revenue and expenditure data in 
central government with that of regional and local authorities, special funds, trading 
accounts, and statutory bodies to generate fiscal data on general government.  
   22 
Box 3. Integrated Financial Management System 
 
Over the years, the financial management information system used for both managing public financial resources and 
decision making in Namibia has been inadequate. There were two main challenges for the Ministry of Finance in terms of 
accounting and reporting ? the lack of real-time financial information, and the timeliness and regularity of data 
reconciliation. There were several different and uncoordinated systems and not sufficiently integrated. The line ministries? 
accounting and control systems were not linked to the General Ledger, which led to reconciliation difficulties and delays. 
The commitment records were maintained manually and were not effective to control expenditure. To address these 
problems and enhance management and accountability of public financial resources, the MOF together with the Department 
of Public Service Information Technology in the Office of the Prime Minister embarked upon a project for the 
implementation of an integrated financial management system (IFMS) to replace the fragmented and outdated existing 
system.  
 
An IFMS was initially implemented on a pilot basis in October 2005 in four ministries, namely Finance, Defense, 
Agriculture and Forestry, and the Auditor-General?s office. It has been rolled out to the remaining ministries and 
departments in April, 2006. Currently, the system is fully live in all central ministries and departments in Windhoek. 
However, the accounting procedures and guidelines for smooth operation of the system are still being developed and it will 
take some more time for the system to be fully operational. It is expected that monthly accounts will be closed and 
consolidated within five days of the end of a month and the first set of consolidated accounts were expected to be generated 
by end-July, 2006. The real time information for all ministries is expected to be available by end-August, 2006.    
 
During the discussion with the IFMS project team, the mission pointed out a number of issues which need to be addressed at 
this stage to ensure the full functionality of the system and realize its full potential. 
 
? The commitment control function of the system needs to be reviewed and it has to be ensured that: (i) supplies of 
goods and services should be regulated by the issue of a Local Payment Order generated by the system following 
the commitment approval procedures, and all suppliers should be informed through a public notice to comply with 
this requirement; (ii) all types of expenditure including running expenditures like rent and payment of utilities 
which does not require formal commitments need to be processed and approved as commitments before system 
authorizes their payments; and (iii) the system generates a report on outstanding commitments and unpaid bills to 
monitor payment arrears. 
? The IFMS chart of accounts consists of 8 segments with a total 31 digits code. Some of these segments like Cost 
Centre and I.D. code still needs to be developed. In addition, there are a number of other issues with the IFMS 
chart of accounts, as pointed out in the MTEF box. The budget classification and chart of accounts need to be 
reviewed and revised to build in the MTEF program classification and improve the economic classification in line 
with the GFSM 2001. Also the IFMS should be able to generate reports by functional classification, which is 
currently being done by the Economic Policy Advisory Services with the help of spread sheets. 
? The bank reconciliation functionality of the system needs to be fully tested and further developed, if necessary. It 
would be ideal if the system could have an interface with the Bank of Namibia payment system so that all bank 
accounts could be reconciled automatically, if that is not feasible, the system should facilitate the downloading of 
the bank statements files in a convenient manner. 
? It appears that various sets of data transferred to the IFMS from previous systems were not fully verified, 
reconciled and validated before transfer. For example, the pay roll data should have been fully verified and 
updated to avoid the recurrence of errors and omissions under the new system. Similarly, the closing balance of 
various ledger accounts including suspense accounts needs to be verified and reconciled before these are carried 
forward as opening balance on the IFMS.   
? The function of internal audit in the IFMS needs to be developed, as a part of internal controls and checks to be 
applied by the system.  
? Suitable management reports and fiscal reports need to be designed and developed for generation by the system. 
The budget preparation module is still being developed. It would be useful if this module could automate the entire budget 
process starting with development of macro-economic projections, MTEF process including development of budget ceilings 
and formulation of medium-term budget estimates.      
 
   23 
A systematic coordination between budget execution and financial management is being 
developed.                                                                                                                   3.3.1, 2.1.4 
56.      The Ministry of Finance in conjunction with the Bank of Namibia has developed 
a sound mechanism of cash planning on an annual and a monthly basis, which guides 
the process of setting monthly ceilings for budget releases through Treasury 
Authorization Warrants. The coordination between cash and debt management has been 
achieved by the creation of a Cash Flow Working Group comprising senior officials of the 
Ministry of Finance, including those from the Directorate of Inland Revenue, the National 
Planning Commission, and the Bank of Namibia. This group meets every month and reviews 
projections for cash inflows, outflows, and financing requirements developed by a cash 
planning unit, and determines cash available for issue of TAWs. In addition, a committee 
chaired by the Minister of Finance monitors the overall cash position of the Government 
including major inflows and outflows and financing of deficit. There is a very clear and well 
developed debt management strategy supported by a good monitoring system (see details on 
debt later). 
The public procurement system needs to be modernized.                                        3.3.2                             
 
57.      The legal framework for the procurement system comprises the: (i) Tender Board 
Act, 1996, (ii) Tender Board Regulations, 1996 (Act 16 of 1996), and (iii) Tender Board 
Code of Procedures, which primarily deals with the administration of the tender board. 
Procurement rules are considered to be open and transparent, and provide for competition 
built around a price preference for goods produced, manufactured, or assembled in Namibia, 
and small and medium enterprises to encourage local industrial and commercial interests. 
The central Tender Board is responsible for procurement of goods and services. The Tender 
Board is an independent entity14 under the Ministry of Finance, and its Director reports 
directly to the Permanent Secretary. Request for bids are published in various media. The 
Board, after opening and listing all tenders, submits them to the relevant line ministry/agency 
for recommendation. The Permanent Secretary of the relevant ministry evaluates the bids and 
makes recommendations to the Board on the award of the tender. In case the lowest tender is 
not recommended, the permanent secretary needs to certify that the recommendation is made 
in the best interest of the Government and represents best value to the Government.  
58.      The efficiency of the current procurement system is undermined by a number of 
factors: (i) the capacity and professional skills of the tender board staff is limited, half of the 
established posts are vacant, and there is a heavy workload as a result of low threshold 
(N$10,000) for issue of tenders; (ii) the tender board still works in a manual mode, as the 
processes and records are yet to be computerized; (iii) the line ministries may need 
strengthened guidelines and capacity building on how to screen bids and make 
recommendations; (iv) the performance of the awarded tenders is not being monitored on a 
                                                 
14 The Tender Board of Namibia has been established under the Tender Board of Namibia Act 1996, though 
administratively it is under the supervision of the Ministry of Finance, a common practice followed in a number 
of African countries.  
   24 
sufficiently regular basis, and apparently there are a number of cases where a ministry chose 
to obtain goods and services from a supplier other than the successful bidder; (v) sanctions 
and penalties for non-compliance are limited; and (vi) there is some discretion in the process, 
since the overriding criteria of selection of the final bid is not just the least cost. For 
completed procurements, the Ministry of Finance could provide on their website the relevant 
data like the number of participants, final bids, and award of the tender. A review of the 
procurement system is currently being carried out in order to enhance the efficiency of the 
system. The review should aim at following the best practices in the procurement system by 
strengthening procurement rules and the legislative framework. 
Public service employment procedures are clear and well understood.                       3.3.2 
59.      The Public Service Act, 1995 (Act 13 of 1995) and related regulations and staff 
rules clearly lay out the establishment and management of the public service. The Public 
Service commission is the arbiter of transparency and fairness of recruitment in the Public 
Service. Namibia spent about 14.7 percent of GDP on personnel costs in 2004/05, accounting 
for more than half of current expenditures and about two-fifths of total spending, which is 
high by an international and African standard. This high level of spending reflects a high 
level of public sector employment, which is now stabilized and may decline over time.15  
The internal audit is weak, and this function in line ministries is still evolving.         3.3.3 
 
60.      Until early 2004, internal audit was conducted centrally by the Treasury through 
its designation of any officer or officers of the Ministry of Finance to carry out 
investigations at ministries, public offices, and statutory institutions relating to 
functions of the Treasury (Section 14 of the State Finance Act, 1991). This was not really 
an internal audit, rather an inspection carried out by the Treasury officials to investigate cases 
of non-compliance with financial rules. In early 2004, the Government decided to adopt 
modern, internationally accepted standards and approaches to internal audit, and issued a 
letter to all Permanent Secretaries proposing that: (i) every office, ministry, and agency 
should have its own internal audit function, and this function may be provided by the 
ministry?s own staff, or outsourced to another ministry or an external agency; (ii) the 
Ministry of Finance will set standards for internal audit, monitor compliance and provide 
guidance and advice, and (iii) the Ministry of Finance will identify appropriate training and 
in due course professional qualifications for internal auditors.  
61.      Over the last two years, the implementation of these instructions has been very 
limited. It appears that ministries have set up their own internal audit units with a separate 
establishment and a grading structure with the approval of the office of the Prime Minister. 
However the Ministry of Finance has neither set any standards for internal audit, nor issued 
any guidelines to the ministries on the role and responsibilities of internal audit function. The 
Ministry of Finance is also not monitoring the functioning of internal audits in any manner. 
                                                 
15 See Koshy Mathai, 2005, ?The Namibian Civil Service and the Government Wage Bill,? Namibia: Selected 
Issues and Statistical Appendix, pp. 23-40. 
   25 
Also the Office of the Auditor-General has not been involved in guiding the development of 
this function. As a result, Ministries? internal audit units have been left to themselves to 
decide on what and how they should do internal audit.  
62.      The development of internal audit in this manner is likely to be wasteful and 
result in an inefficient audit system. The Ministry of Finance needs to take a central role in 
developing the internal audit function and assist the line ministries in establishing and 
managing this function efficiently. The Ministry of Finance needs to start by setting internal 
audit standards, developing and issuing guidelines and manual and training internal audit 
staff of line ministries. Its function would then be necessary to supervise the functioning and 
compliance of line ministries to those internal audit standards to ensure quality and 
compliance.                   
The tax administration lacks effective internal monitoring and control 
 mechanisms.                     3.3.3 
 
63.      A system of audit exists for auditing taxpayers but presently there is no effective 
mechanism for the assurance of staff integrity. There is a system of departmental 
supervision and a general Code of Conduct for the public service. But there is no separate 
Code of Conduct for the Directorate of Inland Revenue?s staff about tax administration-
related matters. There is, however, a plan to introduce such as code in the near future.  
64.      The distinct lack of audit capacity in the Directorate of Inland Revenue remains 
a serious concern. The Directorate is currently using auditors from the private audit 
community to conduct forensic audits on its behalf. A tender was awarded to a consortium of 
auditors and the appointment of the auditors was done with the cooperation of the Office of 
the Auditor General. A forensic tax audit on the northern regional tax office (Oshakati) 
started two years ago. The terms of reference include not only audits of the taxpayers but also 
focused on possible misconduct by officials. Apart from the normal income tax and VAT 
audit, considerable time was devoted to curbing ?round tripping? at the border posts, which 
has a detrimental impact on VAT collections. A report to Parliament on the outcome will 
take place soon. The central regional office will also be subject to a forensic tax audit. The 
necessary arrangements have been completed to appoint private auditors for this exercise. It 
is estimated that the exercise will be roughly five times bigger than the Oshakati audit. 
Taxpayers for audit have been selected on the basis of region, activity, taxable income/loss, 
and type of taxpayer. For multinational taxpayers, there will be focus on transfer pricing. The 
Directorate has appreciates that outsourcing its audit is not a viable permanent solution to 
addressing tax evasion but considers it necessary until such time as it can develop an 
appropriate audit capacity of its own. 
The national tax administration is functionally organized into five divisions and 
operates as part of the Ministry of Finance.                                                                    3.3.4 
65.      The Directorate of Inland Revenue is part of the Ministry of Finance and hence 
is financed by annual appropriation under the annual budget. Presently there is no 
system of sharing of fines or fees. The Directorate is consolidated under a single organization 
and in addition to regional offices is arranged functionally under five sub-divisions: (i) 
   26 
legislation and tax policy; (ii) administration and support; (iii) operations; (iv) special 
investigations; and (v) training. Information on the structure of tax administration, however, 
is not distributed to the public, although such information is readily available. Also, no 
published reports are available giving the structure of tax administration.  
66.      The Directorate of Inland Revenue does not provide regular reports to the 
Legislature and/or the public on their performance in administering the tax laws. There 
are no regular publications on revenue collection during the course of a fiscal year. The 
information, however, is available and can be given to people on request. The Directorate 
realizes that this is a shortcoming and is currently seeking assistance from the U.S. Treasury 
in order to remedy it. 
67.      No efforts have ever been made to estimate the cost of administration and the 
cost of compliance. The cost of administration can be determined from the annual budget 
appropriation. The estimation of cost of compliance implies extra effort and time and 
provision of additional funding. But this information would enable the Ministry of Finance to 
identify ways of saving on costs to the economy and making tax administration more user-
friendly to taxpayers. By not estimating the costs of administration and compliance on a 
regular basis, the Directorate is forgoing an opportunity of planning for and implementing a 
more efficient and cost effective tax administration. 
The Legislature does not receive in-year reports on budget outturn, and does not 
undertake a mid-year review.                                                                                          3.4.1 
68.      The Ministry of Finance does not conduct a mid-year review of budget 
implementation. No formal mid-year reports on budget outturn are generated. Nor does 
the Legislature ask the Government to present a mid-year review of budget execution. The 
National Assembly formally receives only the annual financial statements and the audit 
report prepared by the Auditor-General. 
The audited final accounts are not normally available within twelve months of the end 
of the fiscal year.                                                                                                               3.4.2 
69.      In terms of section 27 of the State Finance Act, the Auditor-General is required 
to submit to the Minister of Finance the audited final accounts together with his report 
as soon as practicable after the end of a financial year but not later than the end of the 
following financial year. However, this is not being done and there is a backlog of audit 
reports as explained later. The Auditor-General also audits the accounts of statutory bodies, 
local authorities, special funds and other agencies. However their audited final accounts and 
reports are also not normally available within twelve months of the end of the fiscal year, 
there is a typical lag of 6?12 months in making audited government accounts available. The 
details of the delay are provided in para. 94.   
The objectives and expected results of government programs are discussed in the 
MTEF, however actual progress is not reported against these objects.                3.2.2, 3.4.2 
70.      Through the introduction of the MTEF and MTPs, the Government has 
indicated its commitment to strengthen its budget policy and planning processes and 
   27 
improve efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures. The MTPs for each Vote 
indicate the allocation of resources by each Program and how the Programs will help to 
achieve the Ministries? objectives, which contribute to the overall national development 
objectives. The Programs? objectives are usually discussed in a general manner, and 
measurable performance indicators still need to be developed. Another major problem, as 
discussed earlier, is that there is as yet no explicit link between the MTEF and the budget 
classification, and the accounting system can not report on Programs. There is hence no 
scope for monitoring financial performance of these programs. Similarly, PEMP indicators 
are still being embedded into the budget planning and monitoring processes. Accountability 
Reports will support efforts by line ministries to measure performance, and to report and 
follow-up on PEMP indicators  
C.   Public Availability of Information 
 
Fiscal information is reasonably comprehensive but its availability to the public is still 
limited.                                                                                                                                2.1.1 
71.      The Government is committed to providing information to the public on fiscal 
objectives and the budget. The main vehicles are the documents submitted for the budget, 
the Statement for the Budget, the Macro-Economic and Budgetary Framework, the MTEF, 
the Estimates of Revenues and Expenditures, the Appropriations Act, and the Three-Year 
Rolling Development Budget, all of which are published and made available to the public on 
the Ministry of Finance?s website, www.mof.gov.na or the National Planning Commission?s 
website, www.npc.gov.na. In addition, the Government publishes the annual Appropriations 
Act, which provides the appropriated level of expenditure by Vote, and the reports of the 
Auditor-General, which are made available through the web. In addition, there may be 
periodic reports made available to the public, for example, the Development Co-operation 
Report, 2003/04, published by the National Planning Commission, which discusses donor 
funding and its uses.  
72.      There are two main shortcomings in the provision of budgetary information: (i) 
the lack of data on the budget execution on the basis of current receipts and 
expenditures, and (ii) the lack of data on budget execution on a Program basis. The 
Ministry of Finance has been developing a quarterly information release, which, when it is 
made public, will address the absence of execution data. It will provide current receipts and 
expenditures, and the budget balance on a quarter by quarter basis and cumulated for the 
year. It will also provide information on cash balances, net borrowing, public debt, and 
contingent liabilities. In addition, the ministry needs to cover a means to provide budget 
execution on a Program basis, consistent with the budget submission.  
The budget documents cover the State Revenue Fund?s activities comprehensively, but 
provide relatively little coverage of other parts of the public sector.                             2.1.1 
73.      The budget documents cover the State Revenue Fund?s activities 
comprehensively but the coverage is not comprehensive, missing out on external donor 
fund activities, most state-owned enterprises, and other extrabudgetary funds including the 
National Energy Fund, the Road Fund Administration, and the Government Institutions 
   28 
Pension Fund. The defense budget has a separate Vote, included in the MTEF, with detailed 
estimates of revenue and expenditure. 
74.      The budgets of the state-owned enterprises are only reflected in the state budget 
insofar as transfers and equity injections and on-lending are included in the relevant 
ministry?s budget. In addition, these enterprises may be taxpayers and paying dividends to 
the central government. The subsidies to state-owned enterprises are significant, especially to 
a few chronic loss-makers, such as Air Namibia. The state-enterprises? income or asset 
statements are shown separately in the budget documentation to the extent they provide these 
reports to Government (only some of these statements were presented in the fiscal year 
2006/07 MTEF). The Ministry of Finance is attempting over time to improve this reporting 
under the provisions of the State-Owned Enterprises Bill, 2005. 
The budget documents provide the main fiscal aggregates for the past and a forecast of 
the fiscal data.                                                                                                                  2.1.2   
75.      The budget documents, principally the MTEF, present the main fiscal 
aggregates for the three years prior to the fiscal year, the budget for the current fiscal 
year, and estimates for the two years beyond the fiscal year. The MTEF currently 
presents only the budget estimates for the fiscal year that is concluding which means there is 
a lag in public availability of information on the outturn, as estimates for the fiscal year 
ending with the beginning of the new fiscal year are provided only in the budget document of 
the following fiscal year (that is, the execution of the fiscal year 2005/06 budget will only be 
available in the budget document for 2007/08). The Ministry of Finance?s quarterly bulletin 
will address this problem once it becomes public. 
76.      Additional information on fiscal aggregates is found in the Macroeconomic and 
Budgetary Framework and the Estimates of Revenues and Expenditures documents, in 
somewhat different formats. 
Statements on government guarantees are available.                                               2.1.3 
77.      The Ministry of Finance provides information on the amount of outstanding 
guarantees, which are published in the MTEF. These figures are also published in the 
Bank of Namibia quarterly bulletins and annual reports. Similarly, the Ministry of Finance 
reports on guarantees assumed by the budget in the MTEF. Government-guaranteed debt was 
6.5 percent of GDP in 2005/06, down from a peak of 13 percent in 2001/02, and is split 
roughly evenly between foreign and domestic debt.  
78.      Contingent liabilities are not estimated or presented on regular basis. Although 
there may be any number of types of contingent liabilities, including those that are both 
explicit in nature, such as loan guarantees, and implicit in nature, such as the need to 
recapitalize a financial institution, it would be desirable if the budget documents would lay 
out the issues comprehensively and with quantification, where possible. For instance, 
information on guarantees is given but without any assessment of the likelihood of default. 
Since such information might be confidential or sensitive, these issues could be considered 
based on the historical experience or in general terms. On a realized basis, contingent 
   29 
liabilities that have fallen to the budget could be quantified more precisely, for instance, the 
list of guaranteed loans or on-lent funds for which debt service was assumed by the budget.  
79.      Although the Development Bank of Namibia is still gearing up, the problems in 
the Agricultural Bank suggest the importance of careful supervision of public banks. 
Such concerns need to be addressed similarly with other state-owned enterprises that are not 
financially sound and for which the Government has some explicit obligations through 
guaranteed debt and on-lent funds and implicit obligations owing to the systemic importance 
of the entity. 
Statements on tax expenditures are not included in the budget documents.            2.1.3 
80.      The Directorate of Inland Revenue does not yet construct or present estimates of 
tax expenditures. However, it indicated its willingness to undertake this exercise if a 
decision to do so is taken by the Ministry of Finance. 
Quasi-fiscal activities are neither discussed nor quantified formally.                      2.1.3 
81.      As with contingent liabilities, quasi-fiscal activities are sometimes hard to define, 
reflecting activities with fiscal implications undertaken on behalf of the Government in 
an indirect manner, either by the Government or by nongovernmental entities. Such 
arrangements may lead to a significant loss of transparency. These would include, for 
example, subsidized lending in the banking system (by public or private banks) and fuel price 
controls that result in below market prices at times. In a broader sense, it would also include 
the impact of Government laws or regulations that require among other things the provision 
of certain normally privately provided services or goods to employees (such as housing or 
food), and other mandates that serve social goals. The estimate of the expense to the budget 
of these activities is reflected in the budget documents mainly through the line items for 
subsidies or equity injections to the various entities conducting these activities and can also 
include forgone revenues for entities receiving tax breaks. For example, the cost of 
maintaining fuel prices at below market prices in the past few years led to large losses in the 
National Energy Fund.   
Information on gross public debt is published.                                                            2.1.4 
82.      Government debt was 33.6 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2004/05, of which 
28.2 percent of GDP was domestic debt and 5.4 percent of GDP was foreign debt. 
Although this debt is moderate, it has risen from a very low level at the time of 
independence. The majority of external debt is concessional and matures in a fairly uniform 
manner over the next 20 years. The domestic debt has a short maturity, with a majority 
accounted for by treasury bills. Namibia received an investment grade rating from Fitch 
Ratings on long-term foreign currency risk of BBB- and on long-term domestic currency risk 
of BBB in 2005. 
83.      The Ministry of Finance provides information on gross public debt, both 
domestic and foreign, in the MTEF. The quarterly bulletin will enhance reporting on this 
debt and make it more timely. The Bank of Namibia provides in its quarterly bulletin and 
annual report a table on domestic debt, broken down into treasury securities and internally 
   30 
registered stocks (i.e., medium and long-term bonds) by category of maturity and by holders 
of this debt, as issued in the primary market.  
84.      The Ministry of Finance has devised a comprehensive plan for the management 
of debt, described in its Sovereign Debt Management Strategy, which has not yet been 
made available to the public.16 Underpinning this strategy is the intention to lengthen the 
maturity of Government debt to reduce rollover and liquidity risk and to diversify the 
portfolio. In addition, this document outlines a strategy for establishing clear and more 
transparent procedures for the issuance of guarantees, on-lending agreements, and borrowing 
by the central government and state-owned enterprises. The Ministry of Finance will also 
soon begin publishing a document entitled, External Borrowing Requirement and Funding 
Plan, on an annual basis.  
Information on government assets is not published nor is it readily available.         2.1.4 
85.      The Ministry of Finance does not keep any comprehensive information on its 
own assets or the assets of state-owned enterprises at market value. Such information as 
exists on state-owned enterprises can be obtained from the balance sheet statements 
submitted by state-owned enterprises to the Auditor-General and other institutions of 
Government. The Central Governance Agency indicated they are trying to establish market 
values for all state-owned entities. The Ministry of Finance does keep records on paid in 
equity of the Government to state-owned enterprises and immovable assets (such as office 
equipment). The Ministry of Lands is responsible for the valuation of land, a key public 
asset.  
Formal commitments for regular publication of fiscal data are made only for the 
budget submission.                                                                                                      2.2.1, 2.2.2 
86.      There is no regular fiscal reporting by the Ministry of Finance except in the 
MTEF to Parliament each year, which provides historical information on the budget 
outturn for the past three years (though the most recent fiscal year is still on the basis of the 
appropriated budget) and the budget proposals for the current year and forecasts for the next 
two years. There is no formal release calendar of fiscal data. The quarterly bulletin and 
annual report of the Bank of Namibia provide historical information on the budget.                                     
87.      Namibia is participating in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) 
regional project for Anglophone African countries. Although there are improvements 
in fiscal data reporting, the fiscal data do not yet adhere to GDDS standards. 
                                                 
16 Ministry of Finance, 2005, Sovereign Debt Management Strategy. 
   31 
D.   Assurances of Integrity 
Budget data are generally reliable and the actual outturn of main fiscal aggregates is 
disclosed to the public but with a long lag.                                                                     4.1.1 
88.      The actual outturn of main fiscal aggregates is presented in the budget 
documents but for now with a significant lag. The variance between budget data and actual 
outturn is discussed in the Macroeconomic and Budgetary Framework. In fiscal years 
2001/02 and 2002/03, actual revenue receipts were higher than originally planned, which led 
to supplementary budgets to allow greater expenditures than originally budgeted.17 During 
the last three fiscal years, there has been no supplementary budget and any additional 
spending requirements were met out of the Contingency Fund. In fiscal years 2003/04 and 
2004/05, the realized budget deficit exceeded the budget deficit enacted in the budget, mainly 
as a result of revenue collections that fell below amounts in the budget. 
Statements on accounting policy are not included in the budget and final accounts 
documents.                                                                                                                         4.1.2 
89.      The accounting system is based on a standard cash-based approach. In general, 
the basis of accounting and standards to be followed are not mentioned in any 
legislation. The Ministry of Finance is responsible for maintaining the revenue and 
expenditure accounts on a regular basis and preparing the annual financial statements and 
appropriation accounts for each financial year for audit by the office of the Auditor-General. 
Since the current legislation contains a broad mandate, the Ministry of Finance could prepare 
the final accounts documents in accordance with the International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards (IPSAS), which is also being recommended by the Eastern and Southern African 
Accountants Group (ESAAG).  
90.      In this context, ESAAG conducted a survey, which revealed that the current 
reporting is not in compliance with the minimum requirements of cash basis IPSAS. A 
revision of the State Finance Act is being undertaken, and this would be an opportune time to 
introduce requirements for standard setting and require compliance with international 
standards, as well as strengthen accountability requirements.   
The process of accounts reconciliation and fiscal reporting are broadly effective.   4.1.3                                  
91.      The accounting system is generally considered to be robust, and major 
weaknesses have been addressed with the implementation of IFMS in all central 
ministries and departments from April 2006. The IFMS would enhance the availability of 
real-time financial information, and thus the timeliness and regularity of data and bank 
reconciliation. In the recent months, there have been some delays in the reconciliation of 
main State Revenue Fund bank account with the Bank of Namibia, primarily due to delays in 
the submission of bank statements and relevant details arising out of introduction of new 
clearing house arrangements. The main bank account has been reconciled up to February 
                                                 
17 The revised budget, which shows within-year adjustments, is known as the ?Additional Budget?. 
   32 
2006. In the monthly accounts, budget outturns are reconciled with budget appropriations, 
and variances are provided. However, there is no formal process for reconciling and ensuring 
consistency between aggregate fiscal data for the government and the government?s position 
based on monetary accounts. There is a considerable discrepancy between above-the-line 
fiscal data and below-the-line financing data. The discrepancy might be partly due to 
divergence in the scope and coverage of the fiscal and monetary data. For example, the fiscal 
data primarily relates to the central government and does not incorporate special accounts 
and extra-budgetary funds, while some of these might be captured in monetary accounts. The 
Ministry of Finance and Bank of Namibia have now reconciled debt and guarantee data. 
The external audit function and its independence from the executive branch are 
enshrined in the Constitution.                                                                                           4.2.1  
92.      The Constitution (Article 127) provides for the appointment of the Auditor-
General by the President on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission and 
with the approval of the National Assembly. The duties and powers of the Auditor-General 
are prescribed in the State Finance Act, 1991. The Auditor-General holds office for a period 
of five years and is eligible for reappointment. He is not a member of public service and 
cannot be removed from office unless a two-third majority of all members of the National 
Assembly vote for such removal on the grounds of mental incapacity or gross misconduct. 
However, the Auditor-General?s office does not enjoy full financial independence, as its 
budget is prepared and approved by the Ministry of Finance like any other ministry before 
submission to the National Assembly.18 These issues are being addressed in the drafting of 
new audit legislation.   
The audit office?s mandate is broad and extensive.                                                       4.2.1 
 
93.      The Auditor-General is responsible for the audit of government accounts, 
statutory bodies, trading accounts, special funds and local authority institutions.19 In 
addition to annual financial audit, the Auditor-General is empowered to conduct special 
audits or any other audits required by the President. He has discretion to determine the nature 
of audits and is empowered to obtain information. In carrying out audits, the Auditor-General 
follows the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions Standards and the 
International Standards on Auditing. The Auditor-General?s reports are public documents, 
which generally includes the scope of the audit, an overview of the State Revenue Fund 
Account covering revenue, expenditure and debts, audit of all ministries, financial statements 
along with audit observations and opinions. A periodic independent audit of tax 
administration is undertaken as a routine part of national external audit by the office of the 
Auditor-General. There is no special or separate process of auditing the tax department.  
                                                 
18 This issue is not unique to Namibia; it is a typical problem in Anglophone African countries. 
19 The audit office is involved in the audit of 31 entities and fund accounts apart from local and regional 
authorities and government ministries, offices, and agencies. 
   33 
There continues to be a backlog of audit reports and the audit function needs further 
strengthening.                                                                                                                     4.2.1 
 
94.      Audits are required to be completed within twelve months after the end of a 
financial year, as required by section 27 (1) of the State Finance Act. A large number of 
audit reports are late20. This is partly due to late submissions of accounts by the Ministry of 
Finance and also due to the limited staffing of the Auditor-General?s office, causing further 
delays in the process. The current staff strength of audit office is 84; the Auditor-General has 
been unable to fill its approved establishment of 109 staff members due to a lack of office 
space. The Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) has assisted the office since 
1994 with capacity building including acquisition of computer and training equipment. The 
SIDA support is assisting the Auditor general to achieve compliance with international audit 
standards and to enhance transparency, accountability and financial discipline in the 
government sector. Despite these efforts, there are some gaps in the knowledge and technical 
skills of audit staff. Also with the ongoing implementation of IFMS, there is a need to 
modernize the audit and use software applications to perform audit. 
The focus of audit is narrow; a reorientation of external audit is required.               4.2.1 
 
95.      The audit primarily focuses on compliance with financial rules and regulations, with a 
limited emphasis on efficiency and effectiveness of expenditures. Many countries have 
moved away from a narrow financial regularity audit that dominates Namibian external audit, 
to systems and value-for-money audits, as better informing the public on integrity of public 
operations. Such audits would assist the government in enhancing the effectiveness of 
performance budgeting, including the PEMP. The difficulties in moving to new areas are that 
currently it does not have qualified staff to perform these audits and its existing audit work is 
already constrained by its limited resources. In addition, it is unclear that there is strong 
support elsewhere in Government for moving in these directions.  
The Legislature discusses external audit reports, however, delays in the submission of 
audit reports have hindered the timely review and follow-up action.                            4.2.1  
96.      The Public Accounts Committee, established in terms of Article 59 of the 
Constitution, has the primary responsibility to scrutinize all reports submitted by the 
Auditor-General to the National Assembly, through the Minister of Finance. The Public 
Accounts Committee examines the audit reports to determine what issues would require 
further attention or, if considered serious enough, to bring those to the attention of the 
National Assembly for further action to be taken. The Committee?s hearings are open to the 
public and press, and external audit reports are made available to the public on the audit 
office?s website www.oag.gov.na. Submissions from independent experts and public are also 
                                                 
20 The audit report on the accounts of the Government of Namibia for the financial year ended 31st March 2005 
is yet to be submitted to National Assembly; the audit report on 2003/04 accounts was submitted on 29th 
November, 2005. Similarly, audit reports on the accounts of local bodies and funds are late. To address this 
backlog, the Auditor-General has been using private accounting firms to assist him with the auditing of local 
authorities and state-owned enterprises. 
   34 
invited during hearing on specialized issues. Follow-up action on audit findings is left to the 
executive, while the Auditor-General office reviews in subsequent audit reports the 
corrective measures taken on the earlier audit findings. There is a considerable backlog in the 
scrutiny of audit reports by the Public Accounts Committee and submission of its reports to 
the National Assembly. Follow-up action taken by the executive is limited and weak, and 
penalties are seldom imposed on cases of financial misconduct including over-expenditures 
and non-compliance with financial rules and regulations. The mechanism for monitoring the 
follow-up action is also weak, primarily due to limited resources and capacity in the audit 
office as well as with the Public Accounts Committee.       
The Anti-Corruption Commission has yet to make an impact.                                    4.2.1 
97.      Although it was established in 2005, the Anti-Corruption Commission is still 
staffing itself and has yet to engage in any substantive investigations. If this commission 
is to add meaningfully to the Government?s efforts to root out corruption, it needs to be made 
operational. 
External scrutiny of macroeconomic models and assumptions underlying the budget is 
not carried out.                                                                                                                  4.2.2   
98.      The approved macroeconomic policy framework is used to draw up budgetary 
guidelines and ceilings. While there is no external scrutiny of the underlying model and 
assumptions as such, it appears that this work is regarded as a technical exercise without 
political interference. There are a number of research institutes and programs funded by 
donors that assess the Government budget and macroeconomic forecasts. The research 
institutes and the private sector more generally could be formally engaged in a dialogue with 
the Government in the formulation of macroeconomic projections. It would be preferable if 
the underlying assumptions and model were also made publicly available and the 
implications of macroeconomic risks more quantitatively presented in the budget 
documentation.  
The Central Bureau of Statistics is formally responsible for national statistics system 
and forms part of the National Planning Commission.                                                4.2.3  
99.      The Statistics Act, 1976 (Act 66 of 1976) provides for the collection, compilation, 
processing and publication of statistics. Production and compilation of official statistics is 
decentralized, with many institutions involved in data collection and/or compilation, the main 
ones being: the Central Bureau of Statistics; line ministries; public sector institutions like the 
Bank of Namibia; and research and training institutions (e.g., University of Namibia). The 
Ministry of Finance is responsible for the compilation and dissemination of fiscal statistics. 
The national statistical system has recently been evaluated by an independent body and a new 
Statistical Law is being drafted to address the weaknesses identified in the evaluation. A third 
National Statistical Plan is expected to come into operation in 2008. 
   35 
III.   IMF STAFF COMMENTARY 
 
In recent years, Namibia has enjoyed sustained economic growth and macroeconomic 
stability. Fiscal policy has generally been prudent.  
100.     Guided by its national development plans, the Government has indicated its 
intention to strengthen fiscal discipline, but continues to lack elements of a fiscal 
program to stabilize the debt ratio and redirect budgetary spending away from 
personnel and subsidies to state enterprises toward programs that will strengthen 
growth prospects and address widespread poverty and unemployment.  
Namibia has put in place the essential elements of a transparent fiscal system and meets 
the basic standards of the fiscal transparency code in the four general areas. In 
particular:   
? The responsibilities of the different components of government are generally clearly 
defined, and the relationship between the central government and the central bank is clear 
and transparent. There is, however, some lack of clarity with regard to the relationship of the 
state-owned enterprises and the central government.   
? A transparent legal and administrative framework for budget preparation and 
execution is in place.  
? The annual budget of the central government is based on a comprehensive and 
consistent quantitative macroeconomic framework. 
? The budget documentation clearly lays out the objectives of fiscal policies and the 
specific policies and framework of the budget; provides a fiscal forecast; and addresses 
issues of fiscal sustainability and risk. 
? Once it is fully implemented, the IFMS will provide information on budget execution 
and enhance the authorities? ability to formulate fiscal policies. 
? The public availability of information on the macroeconomic projections and MTEF 
is comprehensive and timely but timely information on the budget execution is still lacking.  
? The basic legislative and procedural basis for Government?s procurement of goods 
and services, for data integrity, and for internal and external audit is in place. 
Building upon those elements, Namibia has also been making substantial efforts in 
recent years to improve fiscal transparency.  
101.     The Government has taken steps to improve the public financial management 
system, particularly the budget formulation process and the accounting system. Specific 
initiatives include the development and presentation of the budget underpinned by a 
comprehensive macroeconomic framework, Medium-Term Expenditure Framework and 
   36 
Medium-Term Plans for each Vote; implementation of an Integrated Financial Management 
System, formulation of a comprehensive debt strategy combined by improved reporting on 
debt, contingent liabilities, and on-lending; and an assessment in the budget documents of 
macroeconomic risks, policy initiatives, and fiscal sustainability. It has increased reporting in 
the budget on state-owned enterprises and extrabudgetary funds. The Government has 
reduced the backlog in external audit and begun establishing internal audit in the line 
ministries and addressing audit problems of the tax administration. It has established an Anti-
Corruption Commission to address, inter alia, corruption among public officials. 
However, many shortcomings in transparency remain, including in the absence of an 
appropriate budget classification system, fragmentation of the budget process, and the 
lack of an appropriate managerial framework for public procurement and internal and 
external audit. The current momentum of fiscal management reforms needs to be 
maintained to address these shortcomings.  
102.     The key recommendations to further improve fiscal transparency in Namibia 
and help the country achieve the standards of the fiscal transparency code in additional 
areas are listed below in terms of budget reporting, process, and assurances of integrity.  
Budget reporting 
? The Ministry of Finance urgently needs to address the absence of an appropriate 
budget classification structure and improve the consistency of reporting on the budget. In 
particular, there needs to be coherence between the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure 
and MTEF documents. The budget classification structure and chart of accounts should be 
revised so that it can produce a functional and economic classification, consistent with 
international best practice, and a classification that covers the Government?s Programs. This 
would facilitate the reconciliation of the budget execution reports and MTEF, which could 
then be linked to performance indicators, via the PEMP, so that policy makers and the public 
can see clearly the links between the budget, budgetary execution, the programs of the 
Government, and the achievement of program objectives.  
? The quarterly information bulletin should be made publicly available, once its format 
is settled on, and published according to a preannounced schedule, using a consistent 
dissemination format. 
?  The Ministry of Finance should present a mid-year budget review to Parliament. 
? The fiscal data need to be expanded to cover the general government. In particular, 
there needs to be regular coverage of the extrabudgetary funds of the central 
government, including the Social Security Fund, the National Energy Fund, and the 
Road Administration Fund, as well as the regional and local councils. There also 
needs to be better reporting on the Government Institutions Pension Fund, the public
 37 
banks and the state-owned enterprises that are receiving large subsidies or are in 
default on obligations guaranteed or on-lent by the Government.  
? The analysis and reporting in the budget documentation on fiscal risks, contingent 
liabilities, and guarantees should continue to be expanded. Longer-term sustainability 
analyses that also take into account the potential exhaustion of mineral resources 
should accompany budget documentation. The budget should also clearly discuss new 
fiscal policies and their cost or revenue implications, and provide information on tax 
expenditures, and tax and spending arrears.  
? There should be expanded reporting on assets and liabilities of the Government and 
the broader public sector, in view of the predominant role state-owned enterprises 
play in the economy.  
? Once the cash accounting and control system is firmly in place, the government 
should begin moving to an accrual system, and produce financial statements 
consistent with GFSM 2001. 
Budget process  
? Civil society should be more actively engaged in the budget process early on. The 
Government should encourage outside scrutiny of the macroeconomic and fiscal 
projections, included in budget documents, by explaining the methods and 
assumptions underlying these projections more clearly and soliciting more input. 
? The start of the budget process should be advanced and the budget presented to 
Parliament sufficiently early to ensure adoption of the Appropriations Bill before the 
beginning of the year, while allowing ample opportunity for Parliamentary debate. 
? The implementation of IFMS needs to be closely monitored in its early phases to 
ensure that its full potential is realized. A number of recommendations in this regard 
are made in the report.  
Assurances of integrity  
? Internal audit should be strengthened to ensure that line ministries are complying with 
good standards of financial management. The Ministry of Finance needs to assume its 
responsibility to develop a modern internal audit function by setting up standards in 
line with the internationally accepted standards, provide guidance and advice to line 
ministries, and monitor their performance on a regular basis. It should develop 
separate regulations on internal audit, according to international best practices.
 38 
? The capacity of the Auditor-General?s office should be strengthened to allow it to 
move to systems and value for money auditing. There needs to be more follow-up on 
the Auditor-General?s recommendations. 
? Similarly, the Anti-Corruption Commission needs to start its full operations at the 
earliest opportunity and should be given the political support to carry out its 
investigations, with appropriate governmental follow up on proven instances of 
wrong-doing by public officials. 
? The audit capacity of the tax administration and its reporting on its performance to the 
Parliament and public needs to be strengthened. The tax administration should 
develop a code of conduct specific to tax administration issues.  
? The monetary data and fiscal data need to be reconciled on a regular and timely basis 
to give confidence in the accuracy of the fiscal data.  
In terms of specific legislation now being drafted or before Parliament, key 
recommendations are: 
? State Finance Act: The ongoing review and revision of the Act presents a good 
opportunity to draft a more modern State Finance Act, and this would entail a 
comprehensive review and strengthening of the entire legal framework and practices 
on financial management in line with the international best practices. The review 
process has already identified a number of areas where the Act needs to be 
strengthened including enhancing accountability and transparency in the roles of the 
Minister of Finance; Treasury; Permanent Secretary, Finance; and Permanent 
Secretaries/Accounting Officers of line ministries. However there is also a need to 
cover the budgetary and accounting reforms undertaken in recent years: (i) the 
implementation of Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, Medium-Term Plans, and 
Program budgeting in the MTEF for measuring performance; (ii) the implementation 
of an IFMS for budget and accounting processes; and (iii) the role of internal audit in 
line ministries. The draft bill could make the publication of fiscal data mandatory and 
an obligation of the Government, within specified timeframes and modalities. The 
draft bill could also add clarity to important aspects of fiscal transparency including: 
(i) the role of the state-owned enterprises; and (ii) the reporting of on off-budget 
activities and guarantees and other contingent liabilities.  
? Audit Legislation: New audit legislation is being drafted to strengthen the 
independence of the Auditor-General from the executive branch, and empower him to 
modernize the external audit function and discharge his responsibilities in an effective 
and efficient manner. The Act should also move away from audit based on financial 
performance only toward systems and value-for-money audits. Finally, it should 
include provisions for an enhanced oversight by the Public Accounts Committee and 
   39 
strengthen this Committee?s ability to impose sanctions and penalties in cases of 
financial misconduct and non-compliance with financial rules.   
? Procurement Legislation: The procurement system and the Tender Board of 
Namibia is currently being reviewed in order to increase the efficacy of the system 
and a new bill in this regard is expected to be submitted by the end of this year. It 
may be useful to seek assistance in bringing this bill and operating procedures up to 
international standards. 
? The State-Owned Enterprises Bill (Bill 17 of 2005): This bill is now before 
Parliament after the National Council recommended changes to the bill passed by the 
National Assembly in December 2005; this bills aims at strengthening the existing 
legal framework for supervision and financial management of these enterprises. 
However, it does not go far enough in ensuring the professionalization of the 
members of the Board of Directors of the state-owned enterprises and strengthening 
the authority of the central government, through the State-Owned Enterprises 
Governance Council and the Ministry of Finance, to oversee the financial 
management of state-owned enterprises and the payment of dividends to the budget. 
? The Minerals Act: The ongoing revision should: (i) define the rates of royalty for all 
types of minerals, and (ii) limit the discretionary powers of the Minister of Mines and 
Energy.
 40   
 
 
Appendix I.  Resource Revenue Transparency: Mining Sector 
 
 
Clarity of Roles and Responsibilities 
 
The legal framework for resource revenues is clearly defined.              1.1.5/1.2.2 
 
103.     The country is presently exploiting almost all types of natural resources except oil 
and natural gas. This is done under the provisions of the Minerals (Prospecting and Mining) 
Act, 1992. This act is currently under revision and is likely to become final by the end of this 
year. The proposed amendments give to the Minister of Mines and Energy the power to make 
regulations under the act. The proposals also include provisions for regulating the rates of 
royalty and generally improve the interaction between the miners and the Government. Thus 
the act will basically remain unchanged in character.  
104.     The mining of rough diamonds, and their polishing and trade, are regulated by the 
Diamond Act, 1999. It does not replace or substitute for the provisions of the Minerals Act 
but creates additional classes of licenses necessary for the various activities related to 
diamonds.    
Structure of mining industry 
 
105.     The mining sector in Namibia is mostly a private sector operation where the 
government acts as a regulator. The exceptions are the three joint ventures ? NAMDEB with 
50 percent equity participation, DMN (De Beers Marine Namibia) with 30 percent equity 
share, and Rossing Uranium with 3.37 percent equity share. In these three companies also, 
the government participation is limited to management and there is no involvement at the 
operational level.   
Ownership of natural resources 
 
106.     According to the Namibian Constitution and the Minerals Act, the ownership of the 
natural resources vests in the state and all mining activities are prohibited except in 
accordance with the provisions of the Minerals Act. The license and the agreement flowing 
from it cannot override the provisions of the Minerals Act.  
107.     The owner of the land on which mining rights are awarded has only the surface rights 
which are limited to receiving of compensation for loss of those rights. The compensation is 
a matter of negotiation between the mining licensee and the landowner. 
Mining agreements 
 
108.     According to section 49 (b), a mining agreement may include terms and conditions 
relating to reconnaissance, prospecting, and mining operations along with their timetable, 
minimum expenditures on these activities, the processing of minerals, the basis for 
determining market value of the minerals, utilization of profits, formation of joint venture, 
 41  
 
operation of production sharing arrangement, participation including the acquisition of equity 
share by an individual or the state, financial and insurance arrangements, application of fiscal 
laws, and arbitration in the event of any disputes that may arise.      
Roles of government and mining commissioner 
 
109.     The relative roles of the Government, the Mining Commissioner who acts as the 
regulator, and the rights of the mining companies are well defined in the Minerals Act.21  
Mineral advisory board 
 
110.     The Act envisages the establishment of a ?Minerals Board? for advising the Minister 
of Mines and Energy on policy matters relating to reconnaissance, prospecting, mining and 
disposal of minerals and implementation of such policy decisions. The constitution of this 
board is supposed to be quite broad based including representatives of the chamber of mines, 
small-scale prospecting operators and small-scale miners and representative of the trade 
unions. This board was, however, never constituted.  
Licensing procedures are well established with little discretionary power.      1.1.5/1.2.2 
  
111.     Generally licenses are awarded on a first come first serve basis and the applications 
are examined strictly under the provisions of the Minerals Act. All the licenses from the 
exploration to the mining stage follow the process prescribed under the Act and there is no 
scope for negotiations. The applications are made to the Mining Commissioner who makes 
recommendations to the Minister of Mines and Energy for orders.  
112.     While the processing of the applications is confidential, the outcome of the licensing 
process is noted in the Mineral Register, which is in the public domain. Anyone can inspect 
the register free of charge and get a copy of the entries on payment of nominal fees to cover 
the cost of photocopying. The mineral register is also available on the Ministry of Mines and 
Energy website. Also, a press conference is often held at the time of issuance of any major 
licenses. No separate reporting is made to the Parliament or the public. The licensing 
procedure does not vary from project to project and has not changed over time.   
113.     Open bids are not used in mineral licensing and there is no tendering process. In 
energy licensing for prospecting and potential oil and hydrocarbon discovery bids are 
sometimes invited but these cases are limited. Bidders are informed individually and often a 
press conference is held in such cases. 
                                                 
21 The powers of the Minister of Mines and Energy for various activities such as appointment of a mining 
commissioner (section 4), award and transfer of licenses and activities under provisions of a license (sections 
47, 48 and 49-1, 57, 61, 63, 69, 80, 88, 92, 100, 123, 128, 129), payment of royalty and pricing of minerals 
(section 114, 117, 119, 137, 138, 139) are laid down in various sections of the Minerals Act. Similarly the 
regulatory functions of the mining commissioner are defined in sections 5, 19, 34, 40, 53, 66, and 105. The 
rights and obligations of the licensees in respect of mining claims, mining licenses, reconnaissance licenses, 
prospecting licenses, and mineral deposit retention licenses are outlined in sections 31, 32, 36-38, 41-43, 46, 47, 
58, 59, 65, 67, 68, 72, 74, 75, 77, 78, 84, 86, 87, 90, 91, 98, 121, and 130.  
 42  
 
There are state-owned enterprises in the natural resources sector.                               1.1.5 
 
114.     There are no state-owned enterprises engaged in the mining sector. The National 
Petroleum Corporation of Namibia (NAMCOR) is the state-owned enterprise dealing with 
oil. All private sector oil companies are obliged to take fifty percent of their requirement 
from NAMCOR while they directly import the other fifty percent. This arrangement is part 
of an effort to help NAMCOR develop downstream activities in the petrochemical sector.  
Fiscal management is comprehensively covered in the law.           1.2.2 
 
115.     The Ministry of Finance exercises fiscal authority over the mining sector so far as 
taxes are concerned. This is in accordance with the provisions of the State Finance Act, the 
various tax laws including income tax act of 1981, and the exports processing act of 1995. 
The Ministry of Mines and Energy on the other hand is responsible for collection of royalties 
under the Minerals Act. While the natural resource taxes go directly to the state revenue 
account, the royalty is collected by the Ministry of Mines and Energy as provided in section 
114 (1) of the Minerals Act.  
116.     All changes in taxation and royalty are made both as part of the annual budget 
process if there has to be a minor change as well as through a separate legislation if there is a 
general policy change.      
Borrowing by natural resource companies 
 
117.     The natural resource companies that have been awarded the right to mine in Namibia 
can borrow both domestically and externally. They cannot borrow on behalf of the 
Government unless there is a joint venture in place. When local companies borrow, the 
Government can sometimes extend guarantees if the company lacks sufficient collateral. But 
this is not a common practice. Such borrowings are approved by the Ministry of Finance and 
the Parliament is informed about it. 
Equity participation by Government is done in an open manner.                       1.1.5 
 
118.     The Government has equity participation in a number of joint ventures, including 
NAMDEB and Rossing Uranium to the extent of 50 percent and 3.37 percent respectively. 
The Government receives dividends as and when dividends are declared. The equity 
participation and receipt of dividends are reported in the annual budget. 
Quasi-fiscal activities are identified under the law but not included  
in the budget.          1.1.4, 1.1.5 
 
119.     The Minerals Act provides for natural resource companies to employ Namibian 
workers unless the required expertise is not available locally. Also, there is a provision for 
giving training to the local labor. This implies training for acquiring a higher degree or 
additional skills over and above the opportunities for on-the-job training. However, the costs 
of such training programs are hard to estimate.  
 43  
 
120.     There are no requirements for companies to provide for housing or local 
infrastructure although many companies do that to attract better labor force and create 
goodwill among the local community. 
Extrabudgetary funds in mining and oil sector are not integrated with the budget. 1.1.3 
 
121.     Three percent of the royalty amount goes to the Diamond Valuation Fund and 
0.05 percent of the amount due to the producers from sales goes to the Diamond Board Fund, 
both of which are extra-budgetary funds. There is no system of regular reporting of activities 
of these funds. Thus, the total royalty from the mining sector is not reflected in the budget. 
Special oil fees 
 
122.     A levy at the rate of 21 cents/liter is imposed on oil importing companies and the 
revenues go to National Energy Fund. This is an extra-budgetary fund maintained by the 
Ministry of Mines and Energy. These funds are used to protect to some extent the domestic 
consumers from severe fluctuations in the world oil market and regulate the pump prices of 
petrol and diesel such that the cost at the pump does not vary across regions. It amounts to 
subsidizing the domestic sale of petrol and diesel when world prices are high and paying for 
transport costs to remote areas in the country.  
123.     Some partial accounting for the National Energy Fund appeared in the most recent 
MTEF. The amendment act of 2003 provides for issuing regular reports for the information 
of the public and Parliament but the government has yet to appoint a regular fund manager 
for this fund. It is expected that with the appointment of a fund manager in the near future, 
this information would be given out regularly.  
124.     Another levy of 11 cents/liter on oil goes to fund the Motor Vehicles Accident Fund. 
The money from this fund is meant to compensate the victims of road accidents. A third levy 
at the rate of 77 cents/liter is collected as road user charges for maintenance of national 
roads. These funds are maintained by the Road Fund Administration. 
The fiscal regime covering the mining sector is clearly stated and comprehensively 
covered in the law.         1.2.2 
 
125.     All payments to Government are made through license fees, taxes, and royalties. 
There are no production sharing contracts in practice. Individual contracts, including the 
NAMDEB contract, are not published and there is no system of informing the public about 
the terms of such contracts. This may not, however, be a major issue since the fiscal regime 
does not vary from project to project. It follows the prescriptions in the State Finance Act and 
the Minerals Act and there are no deviations. The only discretion with the Minister is about 
setting the royalty rate for specific categories of minerals within a prescribed range as 
provided under the law. The discretion is not about setting rates for individual license holders 
but for specific types of minerals so this power is also limited in scope. 
 44  
 
Tax provisions for the natural resource sector 
 
126.     The main tax provisions applicable to the mining sector are as follows: 
(a) While the normal corporate income tax rate is 35 percent, it is 37.5 percent for the 
mining sector and 55 percent for the diamond mining.  
(b) Taxable income from mining sector is determined in the same way as for any 
other business. Typically, exploration charges are expensed when the mine goes 
into operation, capital development expenditures are depreciated over three years 
from the date of incurring expenditures or starting of production whichever is 
later and rehabilitation expenditures deducted for tax purposes when expenditures 
are actually incurred. Alternatively, the mining company may establish a separate 
trust fund for rehabilitation work. All the future expenditures to be made on 
rehabilitation are assigned to this fund and deducted from current taxable income. 
(c) There is no tax on capital gains. If, however, a business sells a capital good on 
which full write off has been given by the tax department, and if there is a 
recovery of the depreciation allowance, that income would be taxed.    
(d) There is no tax on dividend income from the corporate sector including the 
mining industry if received by a taxpayer in Namibia. If dividends are declared 
and paid to a non-resident, there is a 10 percent withholding tax, called non-
resident shareholder tax (NRST). This can, however, be reduced or refunded if 
there is a double taxation treaty between Namibia and the other country. 
(e) Interest is counted as part of normal income and taxed accordingly and there is no 
withholding tax at the source. This also holds good for interest income accruing to 
the mining companies. A new policy on interest income, however, has been 
announced in the last budget. It is expected that a withholding tax for individual 
taxpayers (natural persons) will be introduced at the rate of 10 percent and this 
will become the final tax on interest income for those taxpayers.        
(f) Personal income tax is imposed on individuals and varies from 17.5 percent to 
35 percent with four tax brackets. This acts as a Pay As You Earn system for 
salaried persons.  
  
Royalty regime 
 
127.     The main royalty rates on the mining sector are as follows (section 114): 
(a)  On any rough and uncut mineral in the precious stone group won or mined by a 
license holder and sold or disposed of by the holder, a rate of 10 percent on the 
?arms length? market value applies.  
(b)  On any rough or unprocessed mineral of the dimension stone group won or mined 
by a license holder, a rate of 5 percent of the ?arms length? market value applies. 
(c)  In case of any other mineral or group of minerals, royalty rate will be determined 
and imposed by the minister under certain conditions: (i) if its value is capable of 
 45  
 
being increased by way of a practical and economic process available in Namibia; 
(ii) if the amount received in an ?arms length? sale was not in conformity with 
international prices; and (iii) the fees, charges or levies deducted from sales value 
was not in conformity with international markets. The royalty will be imposed by 
issuing notice in writing and delivering it to the license holder but such royalty 
would not exceed the rate of 5 percent of the ?arms length? market value.  
128.     It may be advisable to define the rate of royalty in precise terms for cases in category 
(c) above rather than leave it to the discretion of the minister.  
129.     Under section 116 of the Minerals Act, the Minister of Mines and Energy has the 
power to remit, defer or refund wholly or in part any royalty or penalty payment. It may 
again be advisable to limit this discretionary power only to deferral in those cases where the 
company faces a negative cash flow situation.  
Difference between resource revenue taxation and standard tax system 
 
130.     As would become apparent from the preceding analysis, there are only a few 
differences between taxation of the mining sector vis-?-vis other sectors of the economy: 
(a) Rates of taxation for minerals and diamonds are higher than the normal corporate 
income tax rate, 
(b) Special depreciation rules are applicable to exploration and development charges 
and rehabilitation expenditures in case of the mining sector, 
(c) Special incentives are provided to the manufacturing sector, exporters and 
industries in the exports promotion zones that are exempt from payment of 
customs duty and VAT on their inputs as well as from corporate income tax. 
 
Tax incentives in the natural resources sector 
 
131.     There are no special tax incentives applied to the companies or individuals in the 
natural resource sector. On the other hand, tax rates are higher for this sector and the 
treatment of exploration, development, and rehabilitation costs are similar to those extended 
in other resource rich economies.    
Indirect taxes 
 
132.     VAT, excises and import tariffs are applied to the natural resource sector just as in 
any other sector.  
Fiscal stability clause 
 
133.     No fiscal stability clauses are included in agreements with natural resource 
companies. This has been possible because of a stable tax system in the country. Since 1992 
there has been only one major amendment in the tax system. 
 46  
 
Ring-fencing 
 
134.     A proposal to prevent the offset of assessed losses of certain activities from the 
taxable income of other activities is under consideration by the Ministry of Finance. 
Transfer pricing 
 
135.     Under the present law, transfer pricing rules apply to international transactions only 
and not to domestic transactions. The act is being amended to provide for thin capitalization 
rule to limit the debt-equity ratio both for domestic and foreign companies and also adopt 
Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development guidelines for transfer pricing.   
Open Budget Preparation, Execution and Reporting 
 
Most mining revenues are fully reflected in the budget and accounts.        3.1.1 
 
136.     Most of the natural resource revenues, except a small portion going to the Diamond 
Valuation Fund, Diamond Board Fund and National Energy Fund, are fully fungible with 
other resources in the State Revenue Fund and spent through the standard appropriation 
process. The mining revenues constitute a significant portion of Government revenues and 
revenues from NAMDEB alone have varied between 4.5 percent and 12 percent of the total 
depending upon the exchange rate volatility and its impact on exports.   
Standard collection and accounting procedures apply to mineral revenues.      3.3.1 
 
137.     As outlined earlier, there are only minor differences between the tax regime as 
applied to the mining sector and the rest of the economy. The Directorate of Inland Revenue 
is responsible for assessment and collection of all tax revenue arrears from the mining sector 
and deposit the same in the State Revenue Fund.  
Public Availability of Information 
 
Mining related revenues are reported and separately identified in the budget.     2.1.1 
 
138.     The corporate income tax revenues from the diamond and other mining companies 
are reported as separate line items in the budget as estimates of revenue to be received on the 
State Revenue Fund. Royalties are reported as separate line item under non-tax revenues.  
139.     The dividends payment to the government are reported in the budget under the head 
?Dividends and Profit Share? in the category ?Entrepreneurial and Property Income? under 
non-tax revenue. On the expenditure side, ?Total Lending and Equity participation? are 
reported as a separate line item in the Ministry of Mines and Energy budget.  
140.     Thus the participation of the government in resource sectors is disclosed to the public 
through the budget document.  
 47  
 
Assurances of Integrity 
 
Accounting and audit of mining companies is consistent with international  
141.     Natural resource companies are subject to the normal internal controls and audit 
procedures as per the provisions of the company act. Thus they are subject to the same 
standards in terms of audit and accounts as the rest of the private sector. These accounting 
standards are consistent with International Accounting Standards.  
142.     A consolidated financial report covering all subsidiaries are prepared and audited and 
the audited accounts are normally completed within six months after the close of financial the 
year. These financial accounts are made available to the public annually.  
  
 
 
 48 
A
pp
en
di
x 
II
.  
Su
m
m
ar
y 
T
ab
le
s 
 
 T
ab
le
 1
. A
 S
um
m
ar
y 
A
ss
es
sm
en
t o
f P
ra
ct
ic
es
 
C
od
e 
R
ef
er
en
ce
 
Su
m
m
ar
y 
A
ss
es
sm
en
t 
C
om
m
en
t 
O
ve
ra
ll 
su
m
m
ar
y 
N
am
ib
ia
 h
as
 th
e 
es
se
nt
ia
l e
le
m
en
ts
 o
f a
 tr
an
sp
ar
en
t f
is
ca
l s
ys
te
m
 a
nd
 m
ee
ts
 th
e 
ba
si
c 
st
an
da
rd
s o
f t
he
 fi
sc
al
 tr
an
sp
ar
en
cy
 c
od
e.
 In
 re
ce
nt
 y
ea
rs
, t
he
 G
ov
er
nm
en
t 
ha
s i
m
pr
ov
ed
 th
e 
pu
bl
ic
 fi
na
nc
ia
l m
an
ag
em
en
t s
ys
te
m
, p
ar
tic
ul
ar
ly
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 fo
rm
ul
at
io
n 
pr
oc
es
s a
nd
 th
e 
ac
co
un
tin
g 
sy
st
em
. S
pe
ci
fic
 in
iti
at
iv
es
 in
cl
ud
e 
th
e 
de
ve
lo
pm
en
t a
nd
 p
re
se
nt
at
io
n 
of
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 u
nd
er
pi
nn
ed
 b
y 
a 
co
m
pr
eh
en
si
ve
 m
ac
ro
ec
on
om
ic
 fr
am
ew
or
k 
an
d 
M
ed
iu
m
-T
er
m
 E
xp
en
di
tu
re
 F
ra
m
ew
or
k;
 
im
pl
em
en
ta
tio
n 
of
 a
n 
In
te
gr
at
ed
 F
in
an
ci
al
 M
an
ag
em
en
t S
ys
te
m
; f
or
m
ul
at
io
n 
of
 a
 c
om
pr
eh
en
si
ve
 d
eb
t s
tra
te
gy
 c
om
bi
ne
d 
by
 im
pr
ov
ed
 re
po
rti
ng
 o
n 
de
bt
, 
co
nt
in
ge
nt
 li
ab
ili
tie
s, 
an
d 
on
-le
nd
in
g;
 a
nd
 a
n 
as
se
ss
m
en
t i
n 
th
e 
bu
dg
et
 d
oc
um
en
ts
 o
f m
ac
ro
ec
on
om
ic
 ri
sk
s, 
po
lic
y 
in
iti
at
iv
es
, a
nd
 fi
sc
al
 su
st
ai
na
bi
lit
y.
 
 Th
e 
cu
rr
en
t m
om
en
tu
m
 o
f f
is
ca
l p
ol
ic
y 
an
d 
fin
an
ci
al
 m
an
ag
em
en
t r
ef
or
m
s n
ee
ds
 to
 b
e 
st
ep
pe
d 
up
. T
he
 p
rio
rit
y 
ar
ea
s f
or
 im
pr
ov
em
en
t a
re
: 
 (1
) T
he
 b
ud
ge
t c
la
ss
ifi
ca
tio
n 
st
ru
ct
ur
e 
an
d 
ch
ar
t o
f a
cc
ou
nt
s s
ho
ul
d 
be
 re
vi
se
d 
so
 th
at
 it
 c
an
 p
ro
du
ce
 d
at
a 
by
 a
 fu
nc
tio
na
l a
nd
 e
co
no
m
ic
 c
la
ss
ifi
ca
tio
n 
co
ns
is
te
nt
 
w
ith
 in
te
rn
at
io
na
l b
es
t p
ra
ct
ic
e,
 a
nd
 a
 c
la
ss
ifi
ca
tio
n 
th
at
 c
ov
er
s t
he
 g
ov
er
nm
en
t?s
 p
ro
gr
am
s. 
Th
is
 w
ou
ld
 fa
ci
lit
at
e 
th
e 
re
co
nc
ili
at
io
n 
of
 b
ud
ge
t e
xe
cu
tio
n 
re
po
rts
 
an
d 
M
TE
F.
 
(2
) T
he
 fi
sc
al
 d
at
a 
ne
ed
 to
 b
e 
ex
pa
nd
ed
 to
 c
ov
er
 th
e 
ge
ne
ra
l g
ov
er
nm
en
t, 
pa
rti
cu
la
rly
 th
e 
ex
tra
bu
dg
et
ar
y 
fu
nd
s o
f t
he
 c
en
tra
l g
ov
er
nm
en
t. 
(3
) T
he
 b
ud
ge
t d
oc
um
en
ts
 n
ee
d 
to
 b
e 
ex
pa
nd
ed
 to
 in
cl
ud
e 
an
al
ys
is
 a
nd
 re
po
rti
ng
 o
n 
fis
ca
l r
is
ks
, c
on
tin
ge
nt
 li
ab
ili
tie
s a
nd
 g
ua
ra
nt
ee
s. 
(4
) C
iv
il 
so
ci
et
y 
sh
ou
ld
 b
e 
in
vo
lv
ed
 m
or
e 
ac
tiv
el
y 
in
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 p
ro
ce
ss
 e
ar
ly
 o
n 
an
d 
th
e 
bu
dg
et
 c
al
en
da
r a
dv
an
ce
d 
so
 th
at
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 is
 p
re
se
nt
ed
 to
 P
ar
lia
m
en
t 
w
el
l i
n 
ad
va
nc
e 
of
 th
e 
en
d 
of
 th
e 
fis
ca
l y
ea
r. 
 
(5
) A
 m
id
-y
ea
r r
ev
ie
w
 n
ee
ds
 to
 b
e 
co
nd
uc
te
d 
an
d 
pr
es
en
te
d 
to
 th
e 
Pa
rli
am
en
t. 
(6
) T
he
 M
in
is
try
 o
f F
in
an
ce
 sh
ou
ld
 m
ak
e 
pu
bl
ic
al
ly
 a
va
ila
bl
e 
its
 q
ua
rte
rly
 in
fo
rm
at
io
n 
bu
lle
tin
. T
he
 fi
sc
al
 d
at
a 
sh
ou
ld
 c
ov
er
 g
en
er
al
 g
ov
er
nm
en
t, 
an
d 
th
er
e 
sh
ou
ld
 
be
 im
pr
ov
ed
 re
po
rti
ng
 o
n 
st
at
e-
ow
ne
d 
en
te
rp
ris
es
. 
(7
) T
he
 M
in
is
try
 o
f F
in
an
ce
 n
ee
ds
 to
 e
nh
an
ce
 it
s c
ap
ac
ity
 fo
r e
xt
er
na
l a
nd
 in
te
rn
al
 a
ud
it 
an
d 
th
e 
ta
x 
ad
m
in
is
tra
tio
n?
s a
bi
lit
y 
to
 a
ud
it 
ta
xp
ay
er
s. 
(8
) T
he
 m
on
et
ar
y 
an
d 
fis
ca
l d
at
a 
ne
ed
 to
 b
e 
re
co
nc
ile
d 
on
 a
 re
gu
la
r a
nd
 ti
m
el
y 
ba
si
s t
o 
gi
ve
 c
on
fid
en
ce
 in
 th
e 
ac
cu
ra
cy
 o
f t
he
 fi
sc
al
 d
at
a.
 
(9
) T
he
 o
ng
oi
ng
 re
vi
ew
 a
nd
 re
vi
si
on
 o
f t
he
 S
ta
te
 F
in
an
ce
 A
ct
 a
nd
 P
ro
cu
re
m
en
t L
eg
is
la
tio
n 
ne
ed
 to
 e
ns
ur
e 
th
at
 th
ey
 w
ill
 p
ro
vi
de
 a
n 
ad
eq
ua
te
 le
gi
sl
at
iv
e 
ba
si
s t
o 
im
pr
ov
e 
th
e 
fu
nc
tio
ni
ng
 a
nd
 a
cc
ou
nt
ab
ili
ty
 o
f t
he
 p
ub
lic
 fi
na
nc
ia
l m
an
ag
em
en
t a
nd
 p
ro
cu
re
m
en
t s
ys
te
m
s. 
C
la
ri
ty
 o
f r
ol
es
 a
nd
 r
es
po
ns
ib
ili
tie
s 
1.
1.
1 
G
en
er
al
 g
ov
er
nm
en
t i
s g
en
er
al
ly
 w
el
l d
ef
in
ed
, b
ut
 is
 n
ot
 w
el
l c
ov
er
ed
 in
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 
pr
oc
es
s. 
A
 m
ov
e 
to
 c
on
so
lid
at
ed
 p
re
se
nt
at
io
n 
of
 g
en
er
al
 g
ov
er
nm
en
t f
is
ca
l d
at
a 
is
 
w
ar
ra
nt
ed
.  
  
M
ed
iu
m
-te
rm
 p
rio
rit
y 
1.
1.
2 
Th
e 
ro
le
s o
f t
he
 e
xe
cu
tiv
e,
 le
gi
sl
at
iv
e 
an
d 
ju
di
ci
al
 b
ra
nc
he
s a
re
 c
le
ar
ly
 d
ef
in
ed
 in
 th
e 
C
on
st
itu
tio
n.
  
 
1.
1.
2 
Th
e 
ex
pe
nd
itu
re
 re
sp
on
si
bi
lit
ie
s o
f d
iff
er
en
t l
ev
el
s o
f g
ov
er
nm
en
t a
re
 c
le
ar
ly
 d
ef
in
ed
. 
Th
e 
re
gi
on
al
 a
nd
 lo
ca
l c
ou
nc
ils
 p
la
y 
a 
re
la
tiv
el
y 
sm
al
l f
is
ca
l r
ol
e.
   
 
1.
1.
4 
Th
e 
B
an
k 
of
 N
am
ib
ia
 is
 th
e 
C
en
tra
l B
an
k 
of
 N
am
ib
ia
 a
nd
 se
rv
es
 a
s t
he
 S
ta
te
?s
 p
rin
ci
pa
l 
in
st
ru
m
en
t f
or
 m
on
et
ar
y 
po
lic
y 
an
d 
su
pe
rv
is
io
n 
of
 b
an
ki
ng
 in
st
itu
tio
ns
. 
 
  
 
 
 49 
C
od
e 
R
ef
er
en
ce
 
Su
m
m
ar
y 
A
ss
es
sm
en
t 
C
om
m
en
t 
1.
1.
4 
Th
e 
re
la
tio
ns
hi
p 
be
tw
ee
n 
th
e 
ce
nt
ra
l g
ov
er
nm
en
t a
nd
 th
e 
st
at
e-
ow
ne
d 
en
te
rp
ris
es
 a
nd
 
ot
he
r s
ta
tu
to
ry
 b
od
ie
s v
ar
ie
s a
nd
 ro
le
s a
nd
 re
sp
on
si
bi
lit
ie
s l
ac
k 
so
m
e 
cl
ar
ity
.  
 
 
1.
1.
5 
Th
e 
le
ga
l f
ra
m
ew
or
k 
fo
r p
riv
at
iz
at
io
n 
is
 n
ot
 fu
lly
 d
ev
el
op
ed
. 
 
1.
1.
5 
Pu
bl
ic
 la
nd
 is
 re
di
st
rib
ut
ed
 a
cc
or
di
ng
 to
 th
e 
la
w
, t
ho
ug
h 
th
er
e 
ar
e 
so
m
e 
co
nc
er
ns
. 
 
1.
1.
5 
La
w
s a
nd
 p
ro
ce
ss
es
 g
ov
er
ni
ng
 g
ov
er
nm
en
t r
eg
ul
at
io
n 
of
 th
e 
pr
iv
at
e 
se
ct
or
 a
re
 c
le
ar
 a
nd
 
op
en
 b
ut
 c
on
ce
rn
s w
er
e 
ex
pr
es
se
d 
at
 ti
m
es
 a
bo
ut
 im
pl
em
en
ta
tio
n.
 
 
 
1.
2.
1 
Th
e 
le
ga
l f
ra
m
ew
or
k 
fo
r m
an
ag
em
en
t o
f c
en
tra
l g
ov
er
nm
en
t p
ub
lic
 fu
nd
s i
s c
le
ar
. 
 
1.
2.
2 
Th
e 
le
gi
sl
at
iv
e 
ba
si
s f
or
 ta
xa
tio
n 
is
 c
le
ar
 a
nd
 c
om
pr
eh
en
si
ve
 b
ut
 re
gu
la
tio
ns
 fo
r 
im
pl
em
en
ta
tio
n 
of
 so
m
e 
pa
rts
 o
f t
he
 la
w
s a
re
 la
ck
in
g.
 
 
1.
2.
2 
Ta
x 
ex
em
pt
io
ns
 a
nd
 z
er
o 
ra
tin
g 
ar
e 
de
fin
ed
 in
 th
e 
ta
x 
la
w
s. 
 
1.
2.
2 
Ta
xp
ay
er
 ri
gh
ts
 a
re
 w
el
l p
ro
te
ct
ed
 in
 th
e 
la
w
.  
   
 
Pu
bl
ic
 a
va
ila
bi
lit
y 
of
 in
fo
rm
at
io
n 
2.
1.
1 
Fi
sc
al
 in
fo
rm
at
io
n 
is
 re
as
on
ab
ly
 c
om
pr
eh
en
si
ve
 b
ut
 it
s a
va
ila
bi
lit
y 
to
 th
e 
pu
bl
ic
 is
 st
ill
 
lim
ite
d.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
M
ak
in
g 
av
ai
la
bl
e 
th
e 
qu
ar
te
rly
 b
ul
le
tin
 
w
ou
ld
 im
pr
ov
e 
th
e 
av
ai
la
bi
lit
y 
of
 
in
fo
rm
at
io
n 
2.
1.
1 
Th
e 
bu
dg
et
 d
oc
um
en
ts
 c
ov
er
 th
e 
St
at
e 
R
ev
en
ue
 F
un
d?
s a
ct
iv
iti
es
 c
om
pr
eh
en
si
ve
ly
, b
ut
 
pr
ov
id
e 
re
la
tiv
el
y 
lit
tle
 c
ov
er
ag
e 
of
 o
th
er
 p
ar
ts
 o
f t
he
 p
ub
lic
 se
ct
or
.  
   
   
 
2.
1.
2 
Th
e 
bu
dg
et
 d
oc
um
en
ts
 p
ro
vi
de
 th
e 
m
ai
n 
fis
ca
l a
gg
re
ga
te
s f
or
 th
e 
pa
st
 a
nd
 a
 fo
re
ca
st
 o
f 
th
e 
fis
ca
l d
at
a.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
2.
1.
3 
St
at
em
en
ts
 o
n 
go
ve
rn
m
en
t g
ua
ra
nt
ee
s a
re
 a
va
ila
bl
e.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
2.
1.
3 
St
at
em
en
ts
 o
n 
ta
x 
ex
pe
nd
itu
re
s a
re
 n
ot
 in
cl
ud
ed
 in
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 d
oc
um
en
ts
. 
 
2.
1.
3 
Q
ua
si
-f
is
ca
l a
ct
iv
iti
es
 a
re
 n
ot
 d
is
cu
ss
ed
 n
or
 q
ua
nt
ifi
ed
 fo
rm
al
ly
.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
2.
1.
4 
In
fo
rm
at
io
n 
on
 g
ro
ss
 p
ub
lic
 d
eb
t i
s p
ub
lis
he
d.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
2.
1.
4 
In
fo
rm
at
io
n 
on
 g
ov
er
nm
en
t a
ss
et
s i
s n
ot
 p
ub
lis
he
d 
no
r i
s i
t r
ea
di
ly
 a
va
ila
bl
e.
   
   
   
 
G
iv
en
 N
am
ib
ia
?s
 h
ig
h 
de
pe
nd
en
ce
 o
n 
m
in
er
al
s, 
a 
st
at
em
en
t o
f g
ov
er
nm
en
t a
ss
et
s 
w
ou
ld
 b
e 
us
ef
ul
 
2.
2.
1,
 2
.2
.2
 
Fo
rm
al
 c
om
m
itm
en
ts
 fo
r r
eg
ul
ar
 p
ub
lic
at
io
n 
of
 fi
sc
al
 d
at
a 
ar
e 
m
ad
e 
on
ly
 fo
r t
he
 b
ud
ge
t 
su
bm
is
si
on
.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
 
O
pe
n 
bu
dg
et
 p
re
pa
ra
tio
n,
 e
xe
cu
tio
n,
 a
nd
 r
ep
or
tin
g 
3.
1.
1,
 3
.2
.2
 
A
 st
at
em
en
t o
n 
fis
ca
l p
ol
ic
y 
ob
je
ct
iv
es
 is
 in
cl
ud
ed
 in
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 d
oc
um
en
t, 
an
d 
fis
ca
l 
su
st
ai
na
bi
lit
y 
is
su
es
 a
re
 d
is
cu
ss
ed
. 
Th
e 
tre
at
m
en
t o
f s
us
ta
in
ab
ili
ty
 c
ou
ld
 c
ov
er
 
m
or
e 
ar
ea
s, 
in
cl
ud
in
g 
th
e 
po
te
nt
ia
l 
ex
ha
us
tio
n 
of
 n
at
ur
al
 re
so
ur
ce
s 
3.
1.
2 
Th
er
e 
ar
e 
no
 le
gi
sl
at
ed
 fi
sc
al
 ru
le
s u
se
d 
in
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 p
ro
ce
ss
; h
ow
ev
er
, t
he
 
G
ov
er
nm
en
t h
as
 th
re
e 
fis
ca
l t
ar
ge
ts
.  
 
 
  
 
 
 50 
C
od
e 
R
ef
er
en
ce
 
Su
m
m
ar
y 
A
ss
es
sm
en
t 
C
om
m
en
t 
3.
1.
3 
B
ud
ge
t f
or
ec
as
ts
 a
re
 c
le
ar
ly
 p
re
se
nt
ed
 b
ut
 th
e 
as
su
m
pt
io
ns
 u
nd
er
ly
in
g 
th
e 
bu
dg
et
 
fo
re
ca
st
 a
re
 n
ot
 c
le
ar
ly
 sp
el
le
d 
ou
t i
n 
th
e 
fis
ca
l d
oc
um
en
ta
tio
n.
 
 
3.
1.
3 
Th
e 
an
nu
al
 b
ud
ge
t p
re
pa
ra
tio
n 
pr
oc
ed
ur
es
 a
re
 c
le
ar
, b
ut
 n
ee
d 
to
 b
e 
en
ha
nc
ed
 in
 li
ne
 
w
ith
 in
te
rn
at
io
na
l b
es
t p
ra
ct
ic
es
.  
 
 
3.
1.
3 
Th
e 
bu
dg
et
 is
 p
re
pa
re
d 
an
d 
pr
es
en
te
d 
in
 th
e 
co
nt
ex
t o
f a
 th
re
e-
ye
ar
 ro
lli
ng
 M
TE
F.
 
 
3.
1.
4 
Es
tim
at
es
 o
f n
ew
 in
iti
at
iv
es
 a
nd
 o
ng
oi
ng
 c
os
ts
 o
f g
ov
er
nm
en
t p
ol
ic
ie
s a
re
 n
ot
 c
le
ar
ly
 
di
st
in
gu
is
he
d 
in
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 d
oc
um
en
ts
. 
 
3.
1.
5 
Th
e 
se
ns
iti
vi
ty
 o
f b
ud
ge
t e
st
im
at
es
 to
 c
ha
ng
es
 in
 e
co
no
m
ic
 v
ar
ia
bl
es
 is
 a
ss
es
se
d 
an
d 
fis
ca
l r
is
ks
 a
re
 d
is
cu
ss
ed
 w
ith
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
.  
 
 
3.
2.
1 
Th
e 
M
TE
F 
pr
og
ra
m
 c
la
ss
ifi
ca
tio
n 
is
 n
ot
 in
co
rp
or
at
ed
 in
to
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 c
la
ss
ifi
ca
tio
n 
an
d 
ch
ar
t o
f a
cc
ou
nt
s a
nd
 th
us
 is
 n
ot
 in
co
rp
or
at
ed
 in
to
 b
ud
ge
t e
xe
cu
tio
n 
re
po
rts
. 
Th
e 
ad
va
nt
ag
es
 o
f t
he
 p
ro
gr
am
 
cl
as
si
fic
at
io
n 
ar
e 
la
rg
el
y 
by
pa
ss
ed
 w
ith
ou
t 
its
 fu
ll 
in
co
rp
or
at
io
n 
in
to
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 
cl
as
si
fic
at
io
n 
an
d 
ex
ec
ut
io
n 
3.
2.
3,
 3
.2
.4
 
Th
e 
ov
er
al
l b
al
an
ce
 o
f t
he
 c
en
tra
l g
ov
er
nm
en
t i
s t
he
 m
ai
n 
in
di
ca
to
r o
f t
he
 fi
sc
al
 
po
si
tio
n,
 a
nd
 th
is
 b
al
an
ce
 is
 m
on
ito
re
d 
du
rin
g 
th
e 
ye
ar
 . 
 
 
3.
3.
1 
B
as
ic
 a
cc
ou
nt
in
g 
an
d 
in
te
rn
al
 c
on
tro
l p
ro
ce
du
re
s a
re
 in
 p
la
ce
, a
nd
 th
e 
ne
w
 a
cc
ou
nt
in
g 
sy
st
em
 w
ill
 re
qu
ire
 so
m
e 
ad
di
tio
na
l t
im
e 
to
 b
ec
om
e 
w
el
l e
st
ab
lis
he
d.
 
 
3.
3.
1 
Th
e 
IF
M
S 
is
 c
ap
ab
le
 o
f p
ro
du
ci
ng
 a
cc
ur
at
e 
in
-y
ea
r r
ep
or
ts
 o
n 
th
e 
ce
nt
ra
l g
ov
er
nm
en
t?s
 
bu
dg
et
 o
ut
tu
rn
.  
   
Th
e 
IF
M
S 
ha
s r
ec
en
tly
 b
ee
n 
ro
lle
d 
ou
t 
su
cc
es
sf
ul
ly
 b
ut
 it
s f
ul
l c
ap
ab
ili
tie
s a
re
 
no
t y
et
 in
 u
se
 
3.
3.
1,
 2
.1
.1
 
Th
e 
Tr
ea
su
ry
?s
 a
cc
ou
nt
in
g 
an
d 
re
po
rti
ng
 sy
st
em
 fu
lly
 a
cc
ou
nt
s f
or
 a
ll 
tra
ns
ac
tio
ns
 
pe
rta
in
in
g 
to
 th
e 
ap
pr
ov
ed
 b
ud
ge
t o
f t
he
 S
ta
te
 R
ev
en
ue
 F
un
d.
 
 
3.
3.
1,
 2
.1
.4
 
A
 sy
st
em
at
ic
 c
oo
rd
in
at
io
n 
be
tw
ee
n 
bu
dg
et
 e
xe
cu
tio
n 
an
d 
fin
an
ci
al
 m
an
ag
em
en
t i
s 
be
in
g 
de
ve
lo
pe
d.
 
 
3.
3.
2 
Th
e 
pu
bl
ic
 p
ro
cu
re
m
en
t s
ys
te
m
 n
ee
ds
 to
 b
e 
m
od
er
ni
ze
d.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
3.
3.
2 
Pu
bl
ic
 se
rv
ic
e 
em
pl
oy
m
en
t p
ro
ce
du
re
s a
re
 c
le
ar
 a
nd
 w
el
l u
nd
er
st
oo
d.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
3.
3.
3 
Th
e 
in
te
rn
al
 a
ud
it 
is
 w
ea
k,
 a
nd
 th
is
 fu
nc
tio
n 
in
 li
ne
 m
in
is
tri
es
 is
 st
ill
 e
vo
lv
in
g.
   
 
Th
e 
la
ck
 o
f e
ff
ec
tiv
e 
in
te
rn
al
 a
ud
it 
is
 a
 
m
aj
or
 w
ea
kn
es
s 
3.
3.
3 
Th
e 
ta
x 
ad
m
in
is
tra
tio
n 
la
ck
s e
ff
ec
tiv
e 
in
te
rn
al
 m
on
ito
rin
g 
an
d 
co
nt
ro
l m
ec
ha
ni
sm
s. 
Th
e 
la
ck
 o
f e
ff
ec
tiv
e 
in
te
rn
al
 c
on
tro
l i
s a
 
m
aj
or
 w
ea
kn
es
s 
3.
3.
4 
Th
e 
na
tio
na
l t
ax
 a
dm
in
is
tra
tio
n 
is
 fu
nc
tio
na
lly
 o
rg
an
iz
ed
 in
to
 fi
ve
 d
iv
is
io
ns
 a
nd
 
op
er
at
es
 a
s p
ar
t o
f t
he
 M
in
is
try
 o
f F
in
an
ce
.  
   
 
3.
4.
1 
Th
e 
pa
rli
am
en
t d
oe
s n
ot
 re
ce
iv
e 
in
-y
ea
r r
ep
or
ts
 o
n 
bu
dg
et
 o
ut
tu
rn
, a
nd
 d
oe
s n
ot
 
un
de
rta
ke
 a
 m
id
-y
ea
r r
ev
ie
w
.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
M
or
e 
fr
eq
ue
nt
 re
po
rti
ng
 to
 th
e 
pa
rli
am
en
t 
w
ou
ld
 e
nh
an
ce
 p
ub
lic
 d
is
co
ur
se
 
  
 
 
 51 
3.
4.
2 
Th
e 
au
di
te
d 
fin
al
 a
cc
ou
nt
s a
re
 n
ot
 n
or
m
al
ly
 a
va
ila
bl
e 
w
ith
in
 tw
el
ve
 m
on
th
s o
f t
he
 e
nd
 
of
 th
e 
fis
ca
l y
ea
r. 
 
3.
2.
2,
 3
.4
.2
 
Th
e 
ob
je
ct
iv
es
 a
nd
 e
xp
ec
te
d 
re
su
lts
 o
f g
ov
er
nm
en
t p
ro
gr
am
s a
re
 d
is
cu
ss
ed
 in
 th
e 
M
TE
F,
 h
ow
ev
er
 a
ct
ua
l p
ro
gr
es
s i
s n
ot
 re
po
rte
d 
ag
ai
ns
t t
he
se
 o
bj
ec
ts
.  
   
   
   
   
 
 
A
ss
ur
an
ce
s o
f i
nt
eg
ri
ty
 
4.
1.
1 
B
ud
ge
t d
at
a 
ar
e 
ge
ne
ra
lly
 re
lia
bl
e 
an
d 
th
e 
ac
tu
al
 o
ut
tu
rn
 o
f m
ai
n 
fis
ca
l a
gg
re
ga
te
s i
s 
di
sc
lo
se
d 
to
 th
e 
pu
bl
ic
 b
ut
 w
ith
 a
 lo
ng
 la
g.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
4.
1.
2 
St
at
em
en
ts
 o
n 
ac
co
un
tin
g 
po
lic
y 
ar
e 
no
t i
nc
lu
de
d 
in
 th
e 
bu
dg
et
 a
nd
 fi
na
l a
cc
ou
nt
s 
do
cu
m
en
ts
.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
4.
1.
3 
Th
e 
pr
oc
es
s o
f a
cc
ou
nt
s r
ec
on
ci
lia
tio
n 
an
d 
fis
ca
l r
ep
or
tin
g 
ar
e 
br
oa
dl
y 
ef
fe
ct
iv
e.
   
   
 
 
4.
2.
1 
Th
e 
ex
te
rn
al
 a
ud
it 
fu
nc
tio
n 
an
d 
its
 in
de
pe
nd
en
ce
 fr
om
 th
e 
ex
ec
ut
iv
e 
br
an
ch
 a
re
 
en
sh
rin
ed
 in
 th
e 
C
on
st
itu
tio
n.
 
 
4.
2.
1 
Th
e 
au
di
t o
ff
ic
e?
s m
an
da
te
 is
 b
ro
ad
 a
nd
 e
xt
en
si
ve
. 
 
4.
2.
1 
Th
er
e 
co
nt
in
ue
s t
o 
be
 a
 b
ac
kl
og
 o
f a
ud
it 
re
po
rts
 a
nd
 th
e 
au
di
t f
un
ct
io
n 
ne
ed
s f
ur
th
er
 
st
re
ng
th
en
in
g.
 
 
4.
2.
1 
Th
e 
fo
cu
s o
f a
ud
it 
is
 n
ar
ro
w
; a
 re
or
ie
nt
at
io
n 
of
 e
xt
er
na
l a
ud
it 
is
 re
qu
ire
d 
 
4.
2.
1 
Th
e 
Le
gi
sl
at
ur
e 
di
sc
us
se
s e
xt
er
na
l a
ud
it 
re
po
rts
, h
ow
ev
er
, d
el
ay
s i
n 
th
e 
su
bm
is
si
on
 o
f 
au
di
t r
ep
or
ts
 h
as
 h
in
de
re
d 
th
e 
tim
el
y 
re
vi
ew
 a
nd
 fo
llo
w
-u
p 
ac
tio
n.
 
 
4.
2.
1 
Th
e 
A
nt
i-C
or
ru
pt
io
n 
C
om
m
is
si
on
 is
 y
et
 to
 m
ak
e 
an
 im
pa
ct
.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
Th
is
 C
om
m
is
si
on
 n
ee
ds
 to
 d
em
on
st
ra
te
 it
s 
ab
ili
ty
 to
 ta
ke
 o
n 
go
ve
rn
m
en
t c
or
ru
pt
io
n 
4.
2.
2 
Ex
te
rn
al
 sc
ru
tin
y 
of
 m
ac
ro
ec
on
om
ic
 m
od
el
s a
nd
 a
ss
um
pt
io
ns
 u
nd
er
ly
in
g 
th
e 
bu
dg
et
 is
 
no
t c
ar
rie
d 
ou
t. 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
 
4.
2.
3 
Th
e 
C
en
tra
l B
ur
ea
u 
of
 S
ta
tis
tic
s i
s f
or
m
al
ly
 re
sp
on
si
bl
e 
fo
r n
at
io
na
l s
ta
tis
tic
s s
ys
te
m
 
an
d 
fo
rm
s p
ar
t o
f t
he
 N
at
io
na
l P
la
nn
in
g 
C
om
m
is
si
on
.  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
 52  
 
 
  
 
 
Table 2. Public Availability of Information?A Summary 
 
 Budget and fiscal 
report element 
Included in 
budget/report 
documents 
Available to the 
public 
Paragraph 
reference 
Code 
reference 
1. Central 
government (CG) 
budget  estimates 
Yes. Yes. 37, 71 2.1.1 
2. CG defense 
Expenditures 
Yes. Yes. 37, 71 2.1.1 
3. CG extrabudgetary 
funds  
Some. Some. 71 2.1.1 
4. CG budget 
outturns 
Yes. In budget documents 
but with long lag 
Yes. 72 2.1.2 
5. CG budget 
forecasts 
Yes. In budget 
documents. 
Yes. After 
submission to 
parliament. 
75 2.1.2 
6. CG contingent 
liabilities 
Partly. The budget 
documents include 
guarantees, but not all 
contingent liabilities. 
Yes.  77, 78 2.1.3 
7. CG tax 
expenditures 
No. No. 47, 80 2.1.3 
8. CG quasi-fiscal 
activities 
No. No. 81 2.1.3 
9. Macroeconomic 
assumptions 
Yes. In budget documents 
but lacking specificity. 
Yes. 40 3.1.3 
10
. 
Analysis of fiscal 
risks/sensitivity 
analysis 
Yes. In budget documents 
but could be further 
developed. 
Yes. 38, 48 3.1.5 
11
. 
CG debt Yes. In reports of the 
Ministry of Finance. 
 
Yes. In budget 
documents and 
the bulletin of the 
Bank of Namibia. 
83 2.1.4 
12
. 
CG financial assets Some. In reports of the 
Ministry of Finance. 
Not yet. 85 2.1.4 
13
. 
Sustainability 
analysis 
Yes. In budget 
documents, but could be 
further developed. 
Yes. 48 3.1.1 
14
. 
General 
government 
budget estimates 
No. Budgetary elements 
of local governments are 
included in the CG 
budget. 
No 73 2.1.5 
 53  
 
 
  
 
 
 Budget and fiscal 
report element 
Included in 
budget/report 
documents 
Available to the 
public 
Paragraph 
reference 
Code 
reference 
15
. 
CG 
monthly/quarterly 
reports on fiscal 
outturn 
Yes. In reports of the 
Ministry of Finance. 
Central Bank produces 
their own and reconciles 
the data. 
Only in the 
bulletin of the 
Bank of Namibia. 
71, 72 3.4.1 
16
. 
General 
government 
Monthly/quarterly 
reports on fiscal 
outturn 
No. No 73 
3.4.1 
17
. 
CG final accounts Yes. Budget documents 
include but with a long 
lag. 
Yes. 96 
3.4.2 
18
. 
Consolidated 
general 
government final 
accounts 
No.    
3.4.2 
 
 

