NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMPENSATION IN THE NONPROFIT SECTOR
Christopher J. Ruhm
Carey Borkoski
Working Paper 7562
http://www.nber.org/papers/w7562
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2000
We thank Richard Frank, H.E. Frech III, Dan Rosenbaum, Doug Staiger, and Burton Weisbrod for helpful
comments and William Black for research assistance.  Ruhm gratefully acknowledges financial support from
the National Science Foundation (SES-9876511) and from an NBER faculty fellowship for the study of
nonprofit institutions.  The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research. 
© 2000 by Christopher J. Ruhm and Carey Borkoski.  All rights reserved.  Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Compensation in the Nonprofit Sector
Christopher J. Ruhm and Carey Borkoski
NBER Working Paper No. 7562
February 2000
JEL No. J3, J4
ABSTRACT
This analysis provides an in-depth investigation of the determinants of pay in the nonprofit
sector.  The main findings are as follows.  First, holding constant individual characteristics, average
weekly wages are 11 percent lower in nonprofit than for-profit jobs.  However, this difference is
entirely explained by the concentration of nonprofit employment in relatively low paid industries.
Second, an accompanying longitudinal analysis, focusing on movements of workers between
nonprofit and profit-seeking employers, suggests a nonprofit penalty of between 2 and 4 percent.
Third, nonprofit workers in three specific industries (hospitals, nursing/personal care facilities, social
services) earn as much or more than their for-profit counterparts.  However, the effects of changing
the type of employment varies substantially across the three industries. These results raise questions
about several predominant models of nonprofit wage-setting.
Christopher J. Ruhm Carey Borkoski
Department of Economics Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro University of North Carolina at Greensboro
P.O. Box 26165 P.O. Box 26165
Greensboro, NC  27402-6165 Greensboro, NC  27402-6165
and NBER ccborkos@uncg.edu
c_ruhm@uncg.edu
  Page 1
Compensation in the Nonprofit Sector 
 Nonprofit enterprises are an increasingly important part of the American economy.  
Between 1980 and 1997, their fraction of GDP rose from 2.9 to 4.3 percent (Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, 1998) and the number of national nonprofit associations grew 54 percent (Bureau of 
the Census, 1998).  Nonprofits utilize the majority of volunteer labor and account for a 
significant proportion of paid employment in some industries.  Despite their growing 
significance, the compensation of persons employed by nonprofits remains poorly understood.  
There is little question that nonprofit workers receive lower average earnings than observably 
similar individuals working for profit-seeking companies.1  However, since the distribution of 
jobs and employee characteristics differs markedly, it is difficult to determine whether the wage 
disparities reflect some type of compensating differential or worker heterogeneity not accounted 
for in standard earnings regressions. 
To address these issues, this analysis provides an in-depth investigation of the 
determinants of pay in the nonprofit sector.  Our goal is to ascertain how the earnings of 
individuals employed by nonprofit enterprises compare to those of identical persons working in 
profit-seeking firms.  We also include government workers in our sample, and separately control 
for this sector in our analysis, but do not focus on government pay differentials.2 
Compensation in the nonprofit sector may deviate from that in for-profit companies for a 
variety of reasons.  Since any single empirical strategy is unlikely to adequately account for these 
complexities, our investigation utilizes four complementary approaches.  The first investigates 
                                                 
1 For example, Preston (1989) indicates that nonprofit managers and professionals earn 18% percent 
lower hourly wages than their for-profit counterparts, after controlling for human capital characteristics 
and the (one-digit) industry of employment.  
2 Previous researchers (e.g. Krueger, 1988; Moulton, 1990; Belman and Heywood, 1993) have examined 
whether government workers are “overpaid” compared to private sector employees.  We compare workers 
  Page 2 
the size and pattern of the cross-sectional differentials.  The second estimates how wages change 
when workers shift between nonprofit and for-profit jobs.  The third considers the corresponding 
earnings progression for persons changing sectors following job displacements.3  The fourth 
focuses on workers in three narrowly defined industries – hospitals, nursing/personal care 
facilities, and social services – with a substantial mix of nonprofit and for-profit employment. 
 Our results indicate that nonprofit jobs are concentrated in a relatively small number of 
industries.  This is important because the 11 percent pay penalty associated with nonprofit 
employment disappears once industry controls are added to the wage equation.  Movements 
between nonprofit and profit-seeking enterprises continue to suggest lower pay in nonprofits, but 
the differentials are dramatically smaller than in the cross-sectional models.  Moreover, within 
specific industries, nonprofit employment is often associated with earnings premiums.  
1. Relative Earnings in the Nonprofit Sector 
 Nonprofit enterprises differ from profit-seeking firms in important ways.  They are 
frequently exempt from corporate income taxes and receive preferential treatment in state 
contract procurement processes (Frank and Salkever, 1994).  The key feature, however, is that 
they are barred from distributing net earnings.  According to Hansmann (1980), nonprofits may 
therefore be economically efficient when the consumer is in a poor position to judge the prices, 
quantity, or quality of services delivered.4  This occurs because they have reduced incentives to 
raise prices or cut quality, since it is more difficult for those controlling the organization to 
benefit from the resulting increase in profitability.  As a result, Hansmann and others (e.g. Easley 
                                                                                                                                                             
in nonprofit enterprises to those in profit-seeking firms, rather than government, because there is no 
reason to assume that government wages are determined by market forces.  
3 Krueger and Summers (1988) use a similar mix of strategies to study inter-industry wage differentials. 
4 Hansmann calls this “contract failure”.  A classic example occurs when the purchaser and recipient of 
the service are separated (e.g. when financial donations are redistributed, either directly or in-kind, to 
  Page 3 
and O’Hara, 1983; Handy and Katz, 1998) emphasize that nonprofits will be prevalent in 
markets with asymmetric information because they help to solve the consumer trust problem. 
 The nondistribution constraint provides two reasons why compensation in nonprofit 
enterprises might exceed that in profit-seeking companies.  First, managers may have less 
incentive to hold down wages since they do not gain from the resulting cost-reductions.  This has 
been termed as “philanthropic wage-setting” by Feldstein (1971) or “attenuated property rights” 
by Frech III (1976).5  Second, nonprofits have less incentive to shirk on quality and therefore are 
likely to employ better quality workers.6 
 Conversely, some individuals may be willing to “donate” a portion of their paid labor to 
“socially responsible” nonprofit employers by working at reduced wages.7  The resulting 
nonprofit wage penalty will be reinforced if these enterprises attract persons placing a relatively 
high value on institution-specific fringe benefits (such as working conditions, or other 
nonmonetary factors) and a low value on money.8  Also, Lakdawall and Philipson (1998) 
postulate that nonprofits will be concentrated in more competitive and less profitable sectors of 
the economy, where the benefits of choosing the nonprofit form exceed the costs imposed by the 
                                                                                                                                                             
needy individuals in distant locations).  Day care and nursing homes provide other examples of contract 
failure.  In these cases, the recipients of services may have difficulty judging its quality. 
5 Feldstein argues that nonprofit hospitals pay relatively high wages due to “philanthropic wage-setting”.  
Frech III emphasizes that “attenuated property rights” reduce the price of nonpecuniary amenities such as 
pleasant offices and short working hours, resulting in higher production costs. 
6 For instance, in Newhouse’s (1970) model of nonprofit hospitals, managers maximize a utility function 
with quantity and cost as arguments, subject to a zero profit constraint.  This leads them to choose the 
lowest cost method of production but to oversupply quality. 
7 A recent study of Cornell University graduates indicates that those working in “socially responsible” 
occupations or companies received substantially lower wages than their counterparts after controlling for 
sex, curriculum, and grade point average (Frank, 1996).  Also, the vast majority of volunteer (unpaid) 
labor is employed by nonprofits (Steinberg, 1990). 
8 Rose-Ackerman (1996) points out that “ideologues” may accept lower pay for nonprofit work to receive 
greater certainty that their efforts achieve altruistic goals, rather than benefiting stock-holders.  
  Page 4 
nondistribution constraint and other limitations of nonprofit status (e.g. the bar on equity 
financing).  The increased competitiveness implies downwards pressure on wages.9 
 The factors suggest a complex interaction between the class of employer (nonprofit vs. 
for-profit) and relative earnings.  If labor donations are the dominant influence, nonprofit 
workers are likely to earn less than their counterparts.  This will also be true if nonprofits offer 
other positive compensating differentials, such as better working conditions, shorter work hours, 
or lower risk of job loss.  The resulting wage penalty will probably be smaller within narrowly 
defined industries, however, since organizations engaged in the same activities are likely to 
generate fairly comparable social benefits and have similar working conditions.  Nonprofit 
workers might even be paid more than others in the same industry due to “attenuated property 
rights” or “philanthropic wage-setting”, or if nonprofit enterprises utilize relatively high quality 
labor.10  Conversely, the generation of social benefits is less likely to be linked to the category of 
jobs (e.g. clerical workers) than the type of enterprise, implying that the nonprofit differential 
may be little affected by the addition of occupation controls to the econometric model.11 
 Useful information may be obtained from persons switching between nonprofit and for-
profit employees, since such changes automatically control for all individual time-invariant 
sources of heterogeneity.  With exogenous turnover, explanations emphasizing donated labor, 
other compensating differentials, or greater competition in the nonprofit sector would predict 
wage growth for persons moving from nonprofit to profit-seeking enterprises; those focusing on 
                                                 
9 Weisbrod (1988) believes that nonprofits arise when the government us unable to meet the demand for 
public goods (e.g. care for the medically indigent).  This has no obvious predictions for wage-setting. 
10 This argument has been cogently made by Preston (1988).  One important additional implication is that 
nonprofit premiums will be less likely within industries that are extremely competitive. 
11 However, Handy and Katz (1998) and Preston (1999) argue that the nonprofit gap will be greater for 
managers than blue collar workers, since the latter are further removed from the generation of social 
benefits.  Easley and O’Hara (1983) similarly suggest that the nondistribution constraint will lead to 
  Page 5 
philanthropic wage-setting or attenuated property rights would imply earnings reductions; 
whereas wages would not change if cross-sectional gaps result from differences in average 
worker quality.  However, an important caveat is that the job turnover will frequently be 
endogenous.  Of particular importance are voluntary job changes, which are more probable when 
they result in economic benefits.  This issue is discussed in detail below.  
2. Previous Research 
 Previous research on nonprofit compensation, summarized in Figure 1, yields ambiguous 
results.  Early investigations (e.g. Johnston and Rudney, 1987;  Shackett and Trapani, 1987; 
Preston, 1989) were hampered by the lack of information on the type of employer, requiring the 
researchers to impute nonprofit status.  Notwithstanding this caveat, the cross-sectional results 
suggest a large nonprofit pay penalty, a portion of which may be due to unobserved 
heterogeneity.  By contrast, DuMond’s (1997) analysis of the 1994-1995 Current Population 
Survey (CPS) Outgoing Rotation Groups (ORG), which directly indicate nonprofit status, 
estimates a considerably smaller 6 to 11 percent wage gap, with relatively higher pay in 
nonprofits for women than men.12  Moreover, fixed-effect (FE) models – focusing on switches 
between for-profit and nonprofit employment – imply small (0 to 4 percent) and statistically 
insignificant wage gaps, suggesting that the cross-sectional differential results from disparities in 
individual characteristics or preferences that are transferable across jobs.13 
                                                                                                                                                             
relatively large pay reductions for nonprofit managers, although an alternative possibility is that 
philanthropic wage-setting will result in relatively high nonprofit compensation for them. 
12  The regressions hold constant education, potential experience and its square, gender, and dummy 
variables for race, marital status, union membership, part-time employment and (in the models with the 
smallest gaps), one-digit industries and occupations. 
13 DuMond’s results should be interpreted with caution because government workers have been deleted 
from his data set, and it is not clear how the FE models deal with transitions into or out of the public 
sector.  Also, few respondents switch types of employment over the two years and some reported changes 
may be erroneous.  Such measurement error is particularly problematic for FE models. 
  Page 6 
 A second strand of the literature, focusing on nonprofit differentials within narrowly 
defined industries, also obtains equivocal results.  Weisbrod (1983) finds that public interest 
lawyers earn 20 percent less per year than those employed in the private sector, are aware of the 
lower earnings, and expect the difference to be permanent.  He interprets this to indicate that the 
nonprofit gap is due to heterogeneity in preferences rather than worker quality.  However, 
Goddeeris (1988) reanalyzes the same data and claims that the wage penalty actually reflects 
personal characteristics and that public interest attorneys earn no less than had they been 
employed by profit-seeking companies. 
 Research on the nursing home and day care industries is similarly inconclusive.  Borjas, 
Frech III, and Ginsburg (1983) find that nonprofit nursing homes offer relatively generous pay 
and suggest that this represents rent-sharing due to attenuated property rights.  Conversely, 
Holtmann and Idson (1993) claim the wage premium occurs because nonprofit nursing homes 
use higher quality labor and that registered nurses could actually increase their earnings by 
switching to for-profit nursing facilities.  Preston (1988) shows that federally regulated nonprofit 
day care centers pay 5 to 10 percent more than corresponding for-profits (although no differential 
is observed for non-federally regulated centers) and interprets this as evidence of philanthropic 
wage-setting.  However, Mocan and Viola (1997) uncover a statistically insignificant 4 percent 
nonprofit wage premium, with considerable dispersion depending on the type of ownership and 
the racial composition of the staff.14 
 Leete (forthcoming) considers both overall and within-industry differentials.  Using 1990 
Census data which (like recent waves of the CPS) explicitly identifies nonprofit status, she finds 
                                                 
14 Roomkin and Weisbrod (1999) show that there is ambiguity even within industries.  Using data for six 
managerial positions in hospitals, they find that nonprofits offer lower compensation in three jobs (chief 
executive officer, chief operating officer, and top patient care executive) but higher pay in three others 
(chief financial officer, top human resources executive, head of nursing services). 
  Page 7 
that the addition of detailed controls for industry, occupation, or industry-occupation interactions 
eliminates the overall nonprofit differential.  In detailed industries where there is a statistically 
significant pay disparity, nonprofit workers are as likely to obtain premiums as penalties.15 
3. Data and Methods 
 Most of our analysis focuses on 25 to 55 year old respondents to the 1994-1998 Current 
Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Groups (ORG).16  The CPS is a nationally representative 
survey of roughly 50,000 households.  Individuals are interviewed for four months, out of the 
sample for eight, and then return for four final months.  The outgoing rotation groups include 
persons in the last of each of the four month segments, hereafter referred to as years 1 and 2.17  
Our cross-sectional sample includes data for year 1.  The longitudinal analysis refers to 
individuals for whom data are available in both years 1 and 2 (twelve months apart).  Not all 
persons can be matched across years.  For instance, individuals are not followed if they changed 
addresses between ORG surveys.  Our match rate of 65 percent is similar to that obtained by 
other researchers (e.g. MacPherson and Hirsch, 1995) using equally stringent criteria. The 
procedures used to perform the matching are detailed in Appendix A. 
 The dependent variable is the natural log of weekly wages on the “main” job.18  Weekly 
rather than hourly earnings are used because the latter are likely to be measured with greater 
error.  However, work hours are sometimes directly controlled for.  We are primarily interested 
                                                 
15 These conclusions need to be interpreted cautiously for several reasons.  The hourly wages will be 
measured with considerable error, since they are estimated from data on annual incomes, weekly work 
hours, and weeks worked per year.  It is also not obvious how the analysis treats individuals holding 
multiple jobs at a point in time or during the year.  Moreover, the demographic characteristics may 
inadequately account for differences in worker quality and the detailed controls for industry-occupation 
interactions could absorb a portion of the nonprofit differential. 
16 Older and younger respondents are excluded to avoid the special experiences of persons making school-
to-work or work-to-retirement transitions. 
17 The outgoing rotation groups contain supplemental questions on weekly earnings and work hours not 
included in the regular monthly CPS. 
  Page 8 
in the parameter estimates for a dummy variable indicating whether the main job is with a private 
nonprofit organization, rather than a for-profit company (the reference group) or the government.  
The econometric models also control for a quadratic in age and dummy variables for education 
(high school dropout, high school graduate, some college, college graduate, graduate degree), 
marital status (currently married, previously married, never married), race (white, black, other 
nonwhite), Hispanic origin, sex, residence in a metropolitan area, and the survey year.  Some 
specifications add regressors for industry, occupation, or usual weekly work hours. 
 We also utilize the Displaced Worker Supplements (DWS) to the February 1994, 1996, 
and 1998 Current Population Surveys.  The DWS contain retrospective information on persons 
permanently losing jobs during the preceding three years.  Our sample includes individuals aged 
25 to 55 (at the time of the interview) who were displaced due to a plant closure, slack work, or 
position/shift abolished.  The regressors are the same for the cross-sectional models as for the 
ORG data, except that no information is available on weekly work hours.  The retrospective 
nature of the DWS implies some differences in the longitudinal analysis, as discussed below. 
 Variable means are similar for the cross-sectional and panel ORG samples (see Appendix 
Table B.1).  The main differences are that the matched individuals are slightly older, more 
educated, less often Hispanic, and considerably more likely to live in metropolitan areas.  These 
disparities probably reflect patterns of mobility and employment stability.  By contrast, the DWS 
job losers are relatively young, uneducated, infrequently married, and poorly paid.  Most 
importantly, the DWS sample is quite small and few of the respondents were displaced from 
nonprofit employment.  This substantially limits the scope of analysis using this data source. 
  The cross-sectional wage regressions take the form: 
                                                                                                                                                             
18 For multiple job-holders, the “main” job is the one at which the person usually works the most hours.  
If he/she works the same number of hours at two jobs, it is the position of longest employment. 
  Page 9 
(1) Wi1 = Xi1β + Ni1γ + εi1, 
where Wi1 is the natural log of weekly wages for worker i in year 1, X is the vector of control 
characteristics, N is a dummy variable indicating nonprofit employment, and ε is the regression 
error term.19  The coefficient of key interest, γˆ , shows the predicted difference in (log) wages 
between workers in nonprofit and profit-seeking enterprises.  However, this provides a biased 
estimate of the nonprofit differential if cov(Ni1εi1)≠ 0, as will occur if the control variables do 
not completely account for systematic differences in the selection process into nonprofit jobs. 
 Decomposing the error term as εit = fi + eit, where fi is an individual fixed-effect and eit an 
i.i.d. disturbance, γˆ  will be inconsistent if Nit and fi are correlated. We can take first-differences 
to eliminate this bias.  Specifically, if (log) wages in year t (where t=1,2) are determined by:  
(2)     Wit = Xiβt + Nitγ + fi + eit, 
we can difference away the fixed-effect through the wage-change equation 
(3)     ∆Wi = Xiβ + ∆Niγ + ei, 
where ∆Wi = Wi2-Wi1, ∆Ni = Ni2-Ni1, ei = ei2-ei1, and β = β2-β1.20 
Equation (3) will still yield inconsistent estimates if cov(∆Niei) ≠ 0.  A possible reason is 
that job mobility is not random.  Specifically, economically motivated turnover occurs when 
compensation is expected to increase, implying E(ei)>0.  If nonprofit jobs are typically poorly 
paid, switches from for-profit to nonprofit positions (abbreviated by NP→ ) most often involve 
                                                 
19 The regressions also include a dummy variables for government employment. 
20 An alternative is to estimate (1) with the inclusion of person-specific intercepts.  Such fixed-effect 
models yield virtually identical results to the wage change models presented below.  One disadvantage of 
the fixed-effect specification is that it can not easily be accommodated to the DWS data, which do not 
provide predisplacement values for many of the included regressors.  To obtain consistency across the 
ORG and DWS data sets, Xi, in equation (3), is measured at year 2.  We do not control for the selection 
into employment in either years 1 or 2 because of the difficulty in obtaining plausible identifying 
restrictions.  This failure will not bias the estimated nonprofit differential as long as the selection process 
is similar for persons working in nonprofit and for-profit enterprises. 
  Page 10 
some combination of relatively low wages on the original employment or high compensation in 
the new one.  The nonprofit differential estimated from such moves is therefore likely to be 
understated because the conditional expectation E(ei| NP→ ) exceeds the unconditional 
expectation E(ei). The bias will probably be absent or smaller when considering moves from 
nonprofit to profit-seeking employers (denoted PN → ), if the latter generally offer higher pay. 
It is therefore useful to estimate “asymmetric wage change” models which allow different 
effects of PN →  and NP→  and  moves.  Denoting these transitions by the dummy variables 
NP and PN, the asymmetric models take the form: 
(4) ∆Wi = Xi2β + NPiγ1 + PNiγ2 + ei. 
Notice that (4) collapses to (3) if γ2 = -γ1.  Therefore, 2γˆ  and 1γˆ−  provide alternative estimates 
of the nonprofit differential.21 
The transitions that follow displacements are more likely to be exogenous (there is no 
presumption that E(ei)>0), since the job mobility is involuntary.  This suggests that the wage 
changes experienced by dislocated workers provide an alternative way to surmount the problem 
of endogenous turnover. The estimating equations are altered slightly for this sample, reflecting 
the information in the DWS.  Cross-sectional wage differentials are obtained from: 
(5)     Wid = Xiβ + Nidγ + εid, 
where the subscript d indicates the predisplacement job.  The individual characteristics are 
measured at the survey date since data are not available at the time of displacement.  Information 
on work hours is also unavailable.  The wage change equations take the form: 
(6)      Wis – Wid = Xiβ + (Nis – Nid)γ + ei, 
                                                 
21 The models also allow for transitions into or out of government employment and compare the wage 
changes for PN → ( NP→ ) mobility to those of persons remaining in nonprofit (for-profit) jobs. 
  Page 11 
where the s subscript indicates the survey date.  A potential problem is that patterns of 
reeemployment need not occur randomly.  For instance, persons losing nonprofit jobs might first 
look for similar positions and then, failing to find them, search in profit-seeking companies.  If 
so, the observed PN →  transitions could reflect dislocated individuals with relatively 
unfavorable readjustment experiences (E(ei| PN → ) <  E(ei| NN → )) and the estimated 
nonprofit differentials could still be biased. 
4. The Distribution of Nonprofit Employment 
 Nonprofit employment is concentrated in a small set of industries and (to a lesser extent) 
occupations.  This is illustrated in Tables 1 and 2.  The first column of each table displays the 
industry (occupation) composition of all employment.  The second presents the corresponding 
distribution of nonprofit jobs.  The third and fourth columns indicate the share of employment in 
the specific industry (occupation) accounted for by nonprofit and profit-seeking organizations, 
with government the residual category.  For example, the first row of Table 1 shows that 
religious organizations account for 0.7 percent of all employment but 10.4 percent of all 
nonprofit jobs, and that 85 percent of employees in this industry claim to work for nonprofits, 
compared to 15 percent in profit-seeking organizations. 
 Nonprofit positions are concentrated in seven fairly narrowly defined industries – 
hospitals, nursing/personal care facilities, social services, primary/secondary education, higher 
education, religious organizations, and other professional industries.  These account for 26 
percent of all jobs but 89 percent of nonprofit positions.  Over half (55 percent) of nonprofit 
employment is located in just three industries – hospitals, social services, and religious 
organizations – that are responsible for only 8 percent of all jobs.  The share of nonprofit 
employment in these industries ranges from 34 to 85 percent, compared to an economy-wide 
average of under 6 percent.  By contrast, there is virtually no nonprofit involvement in the 
  Page 12 
transportation, personal/business services, wholesale/retail trade, manufacturing, public 
administration, agriculture, construction, or mining sectors.  These industries are responsible for 
almost two-thirds (66 percent) of all employment but just 6 percent of nonprofit jobs. 
 Nonprofit jobs are more dispersed across occupations.  Nevertheless, six categories – 
health professionals, educators, other professionals, health technicians, administrative support 
workers, and service occupations – account for 92 percent of nonprofit employment (versus 60 
percent of all jobs).  Three of these – health professionals, educators, and health technicians – 
employ 37 percent of nonprofit workers, compared to 12 percent of overall employment.  
Nonprofits are virtually absent from the sales, laborer, and transportation occupations that 
employ a large share of the working population. 
 Some of the econometric estimates below include dummy variables for the 
aforementioned seven specific industries or six occupations.  This contrasts with some previous 
researchers (e.g. Preston, 1989 or DuMond, 1997) who control only for broad (one-digit) 
industries and occupations, or with Leete (forthcoming) who includes as many as 20,000 
industry-occupation interactions.  Within broad industries or occupations there is substantial 
heterogeneity in the prevalence of nonprofit activity.  Conversely, extremely detailed industry-
occupation interactions could absorb much of the nonprofit “effect”, since many cells are 
dominated by a single class of employer. 
 The type of employment is reported by survey respondents, raising the possibility of 
classification error.  There is little reason to believe that government or for-profit workers 
frequently misreport the class of employer.22  By contrast, nonprofit employment appears to be 
substantially undercounted.  A careful analysis by the Hodgkinson, et al. (1996) indicates that 
                                                 
22 For example, 100 percent of respondents in public administration report holding government jobs and  
99 percent of those in the wholesale/retail trade or manufacturing industries claim for-profit employment. 
  Page 13 
nonprofits constitute 6.7 percent of the paid work force in 1994.  Conversely, only 5.7 percent of 
the ORG sample claim this type of employment, suggesting that around 18 percent of those in 
nonprofit jobs erroneously report holding for-profit positions.  An identical 18 percent error rate 
is obtained by assuming that 100 percent of employment in religious organization is nonprofit, 
compared to the 85.1 percent reported by ORG respondents.23  Such classification errors will 
generally cause the observed wage gaps to be smaller than the actual differentials, since some 
nonprofit jobs are averaged in with for-profit positions.  We return to this issue below. 
5. Cross-Sectional Wage Differentials 
 We begin our empirical analysis by examining cross-sectional wage differentials for the 
ORG sample (in year 1).24  The top panel of Table 3 displays the mean weekly earnings of 
nonprofit, for-profit, and government workers in selected industries and occupations.  Nonprofit 
workers earn 3 percent less than those in profit-seeking firms (while government employees 
receive 11 percent higher pay).  However, within many narrow industries, there is a nonprofit 
premium – 10 percent in education, 11 percent in hospitals, 14 percent in nursing/personal care 
facilities, and 18 percent in social services.  The major exception is a 7 percent wage gap in other 
professional industries, a diverse category likely to exhibit considerable heterogeneity between 
nonprofit and profit-seeking organizations.  The overall wage gap combined with intra-industry 
premiums reflects the concentration of nonprofit jobs in low paid sectors such as social services 
and religious organizations.  Nonprofit workers also frequently earn more than their for-profit 
                                                 
23 The 34 percent of hospital workers claiming nonprofit affiliation appears low, given that around 65 
percent of acute care hospital beds are in nonprofits.  But this industry category also includes psychiatric 
hospitals, rehabilitation facilities, and post-acute care hospitals, that are heavily for-profit.  Hodgkinson, 
et al. (1996) estimate that hospitals accounted for 33.7 percent of nonprofit employment in 1994, 
somewhat higher than the proportion in Table 1 (29.9 percent) which covers the 1994-1998 period.  
However, the hospital share of nonprofit jobs has been trending sharply down, suggesting that nonprofit 
hospital positions are only modestly more understated in our sample than is other nonprofit employment. 
24 Similar results are obtained for year 2. 
  Page 14 
counterparts in the same occupation (e.g. 1, 7, and 5 percent for health professions, educators, 
and health technicians). 
 The disparities in average earnings may reflect individual heterogeneity, rather than 
differences in the pay determination process used by nonprofits.  The bottom panel of Table 3 
lends support to this possibility.  Nonprofit and for-profit workers are equally likely to be 
married or live in metropolitan areas, but the former are slightly older, much more educated, 
almost twice as likely to be female, work fewer hours, and are less likely to be of Hispanic 
origin.  Some of these differences (e.g. age and education) are likely to increase the relative 
wages of nonprofit workers while others (sex, Hispanic origin, and work hours) probably reduce 
them.  Econometric analysis is needed to disentangle these effects.    
 Table 4 displays the coefficient on nonprofit status from regressions of equation (1).  
Each cell presents results for a separate specification.  All of the models control for the survey 
year, age, marital status, race/ethnicity, education, metropolitan residence, and public sector 
employment.  Columns (b), (d), and (e) add dummy variables for the seven industry categories; 
specifications (c) and (d) hold constant the six occupation groups; model (e) also accounts for 
usual weekly work hours.  The employment characteristics refer to the “main” CPS job. 
 Nonprofit employment is associated with an 11 percent wage penalty, controlling for 
individual attributes but not industry or occupation.  This is consistent with the differentials 
obtained by other researchers (e.g. Preston, 1989; DuMond, 1997).  Adding the vector of 
occupation variables modestly increases the gap (to 14 percent).  Conversely, including industry 
controls virtually eliminates the wage penalty (model b) and when work hours are also held 
constant (column e), the average nonprofit job is predicted to pay a slight (1 percent) premium.25  
                                                 
25 Information on work hours is missing for around 6 percent of respondents.  To avoid excluding these 
individuals, they are assigned a value of zero work hours and a dummy variable for missing hours is 
  Page 15 
These results imply that nonprofit employment is concentrated in low paying industries and that 
observationally equivalent nonprofit and for-profit workers in the same industry receive identical 
wages.26  Leete (forthcoming) has recently obtained a similar result.  However, to eliminate the 
cross-sectional differential, she controlled for 226 (3-digit) industries and 206 occupations or (in 
many specifications) around 20,000 industry-occupation interactions.  This contrasts with just 7 
industries (and no occupations) in this analysis. 
 The average wage gaps conceal significant differences across demographic groups, with 
relatively high nonprofit earnings received by females, blacks, and Hispanics.  The nonprofit 
differential in specification (a) is -7, -2, and -7 percent for these groups, versus -20 percent for 
males and -13 percent for whites.  Holding industry and work hours constant (column e) shrinks 
but does not eliminate the disparities –women, blacks and Hispanics receive 3, 7, and 6 percent 
nonprofit premiums, compared to no differential for whites and a 3 percent penalty for males.27 
 As mentioned, these results may understate the nonprofit pay differential because some 
persons employed by nonprofits erroneously report working for profit-seeking organizations.  A 
simplified version of the formula derived by Leete (forthcoming) shows that the ratio of the 
observed to actual gap in log wages (G) is: 
(7)       G = 1 - 
)1( ρφρ
φρ
−+
, 
                                                                                                                                                             
included.  However, the results are very similar when these persons are deleted from the sample.  Models 
were also estimated with weekly work hours controlled for but without industry variables.  These yield an 
overall nonprofit differential of 5.7 percent, with a standard error of 0.4 percent.  
26 Weekly earnings are top-coded at $1,920 in 1994-1997 and $2,880 in 1998.  The top-coding affects 1.6 
percent of workers in for-profit companies and 1.4 percent in nonprofit enterprises.  Two sets of cross-
sectional models were estimated to provide a crude test of bias due to censoring.  The first deletes 
observations with top-coded wage.  In the second, persons with top-coded values were assigned earnings 
equal to twice the censored amount (i.e. $3,840 through 1997 and $5,760 in 1998).  The overall nonprofit 
wage penalty (without controls for industry, occupation or work hours) is estimated to be 11 percent in 
the first model and 12 percent in the second.  Both are close to the corresponding estimate in Table 4. 
  Page 16 
where ρ is the employment share of nonprofits and φ is the reporting error rate among nonprofit 
workers.  Evidence presented in section 4 suggests that ρ=.067 and φ=.18.  Substituting these 
values into equation (7) indicates that the observed wage differential is 98.7 percent as large as 
the actual gap, implying that the preceding results only very slightly understate the nonprofit gap. 
6. Wage Changes for the ORG Panel Sample 
 We next investigate wage changes between years 1 and 2 for the ORG panel sample.  A 
potential problem is that some reported movements from nonprofit to for-profit jobs (or the 
reverse) probably reflect classification error.  Most obviously, this occurs if respondents not 
switching jobs misreport the employer type in one of the two years.28  The resulting 
measurement error introduces noise and will attenuate the estimated nonprofit coefficients.  For 
this reason, we only set the dummy variables indicating changes in the class of employer to one 
when the respondent states that such a switch has occurred and reports moving to either a new 3-
digit industry or occupation.  Requiring a change in industry or occupation makes it much more 
likely that a job transition has taken place, substantially reducing the classification bias. 
 Table 5 documents the pattern of earnings changes.  The first column shows the average 
growth in (log) wages between years 1 and 2.  The second and third columns provide sample 
means for respondents making PN →  and NP→  transitions.  Earnings rise faster for persons 
switching from nonprofit to for-profit jobs than for those making the reverse move (11 versus 5 
percent), suggesting lower pay in the nonprofit sector after controlling for transferable individual 
characteristics.  However, there is no difference for females or blacks, which further hints that 
the nonprofit sector offers them comparatively favorable employment opportunities. 
                                                                                                                                                             
27 Preston (1990) argues that the over-representation of females in nonprofits is entirely due to higher 
compensation received in these jobs.  She does not perform a corresponding analysis for nonwhites. 
28 Reported changes in employment type could be dominated by classification error even if most 
respondents accurately indicate the class of employer. 
  Page 17 
 The econometric estimates are summarized in Table 6.  Model (a) refers to an equation 
without controls for industry or work hours; specification (b) adds the seven industry dummy 
variables; column (c) also holds constant weekly work hours.  The first three columns refer to 
cross-sectional wage regressions corresponding to equation (1).  These results, which are 
virtually identical to corresponding specifications in Table 4, provide a baseline comparison for 
the wage change equations presented in the next five columns.  As mentioned, the symmetric 
models constrain the change in relative wages to be of equal magnitude for NP→  and PN →  
moves, whereas the asymmetric specifications do not.29 
 The symmetric first difference models reveal an overall nonprofit wage gap averaging 
between 2 and 3 percent, with relatively high earnings once again received by females and blacks 
(but not Hispanics) employed in nonprofit jobs.  The estimated nonprofit differentials are 
insensitive to the inclusion of controls for industry or work hours (see models a through c), 
which is expected since the change equations automatically account for time-invariant individual 
effects.  The asymmetric models predict a 4 percent average increase in weekly wages for 
persons making PN →  moves, compared to a 2 percent decline for NP→  transitions.  This 
difference is anticipated if the NP→  switches understate the nonprofit penalty, as discussed 
above.  However, the disparities are small and statistically insignificant for all groups, indicating 
that there is little cost to imposing the assumption of symmetric wage changes.   
7.  Displaced Workers 
Table 7 summarizes the results for displaced workers.  As noted, nonprofit workers rarely 
lose jobs so this is not a representative sample of either all employees or job changers.  The four 
columns labeled “transition hazard rates” show the probability of entering the destination 
                                                 
29  The asymmetric model presented in the table includes controls for industries and work hours.  Similar 
results are obtained in specifications without these regressors. 
  Page 18 
employer type conditional on initial status.  It is noteworthy that NP→  transitions almost never 
occur.  Only 3 percent of persons displaced from for-profit companies work for nonprofits at the 
survey date, compared to 92 percent by profit-seeking firms (and 5 percent in government 
positions).   The majority (57 percent) of those losing nonprofit jobs also enter for-profit 
employment, versus 29 percent who remain with nonprofits (and 14 percent in government jobs). 
 The cross-sectional equations indicate broadly similar predisplacement earnings for 
persons terminated from nonprofit and for-profit positions.  There is some suggestion of a small 
nonprofit penalty, but this disappears when industry controls are included (compare columns a 
and b) and the nonprofit coefficient is never significant.  The wage change equations also supply 
some indication of a nonprofit penalty in the absence of industry regressors; however, this is 
again eliminated by adding industry covariates, and the parameters are imprecisely estimated.  
Small sample sizes, particularly for nonwhites, and nonrandomness of the displacement process 
imply that these results should be interpreted with caution.  Generally, the small overall nonprofit 
differentials, combined with more favorable effects for females and blacks than for males or 
whites, are consistent with the results obtained using the ORG data. 
8.  Intra-Industry Wage Differentials 
 Table 8 displays the findings of cross-sectional and wage change equations for ORG 
respondents working in three specific industries – hospitals, nursing/personal care facilities, and 
social services.  Together, these industries account for 49 percent of nonprofit employment but 
each also has substantial involvement by for-profit companies.30  Cross-sectional regressions, 
corresponding to equation (1), were run for the full sample and for workers matched in years 1 
and 2.  Symmetric wage change equations were also estimated for persons employed in the same 
  Page 19 
industry in both survey years.  This sample restriction avoids confounding the effects of industry 
mobility with those resulting from changes in the type of employer.  Specification (b) controls 
for work hours, whereas specification (a) does not.  Since the sample for each regression is 
limited to a single industry, none of the models include industry covariates. 
 The cross-sectional results suggest the presence of nonprofit wage premiums within the 
three narrowly defined industries.  Nonprofit hospital workers earn a statistically significant 3 to 
7 percent more than their peers.  An even larger 4 to 11 percent differential is obtained in the 
social services, while nonprofit nursing facilities offer a 2 to 5 percent pay premium.  
Interestingly, models estimated for subsamples stratified by race and sex (not shown), provide no 
consistent evidence of higher relative nonprofit earnings for women or minorities than for men or 
whites, suggesting that the relatively favorable “effects” observed above may have been due to 
inadequately controlling for the industrial composition of nonprofit employment.31 
 The first difference models indicate that switching between nonprofit and profit-seeking 
employers has dramatically different effects on wage growth across the three industries.  The 
predicted pay progression of hospital workers is unaffected by PN →  transitions; whereas, 
similar mobility increases the expected earnings growth of nursing homes employees by a 
statistically significant 18 percent while lowering the predicted wage increases of social service 
workers by an insignificant 4 percent. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
30 Education and religious organizations employ around a quarter of the nonprofit labor force but have 
limited participation by for-profits.  Other professional industries account for an eighth of nonprofit jobs 
but are extremely diverse and dominated by profit-seeking enterprises. 
31 The estimated nonprofit differential (in specification b) is 5.8, 6.3, and –0.9 percent for males in the 
hospital, nursing home, and social services industries versus 2.5, 4.7, and 13.4 percent for females.  The 
differentials are 3.1, 4.4, and 11.0 percent for whites and 4.1, 7.1, and 11.3 percent for blacks. 
  Page 20 
9.  Discussion 
 The econometric analysis yields five main conclusions.  First, holding constant individual 
characteristics, average weekly wages are 11 percent lower in nonprofit than for-profit jobs.  
However, the inclusion of industry controls eliminates the pay gap and, if anything, nonprofit 
workers receive a small premium when differences in work hours are also accounted for.  By 
contrast, the differential is unrelated to the occupational distribution of nonprofit jobs.  Second, 
the wage changes experienced by persons switching types of employers suggest a nonprofit 
penalty of between 2 and 4 percent.  Third, the nonprofit sector offers relatively high pay to 
females and blacks, although this is again largely explained by industry differences in the 
composition of nonprofit employment.  Fourth, the nonprofit differentials estimated for job 
losers are generally consistent with those for other individuals, although small sample sizes and 
nonrandomness of the displacement process require these results to be interpreted cautiously.  
Fifth, nonprofit workers in hospitals, nursing/personal care facilities, and social services earn at 
least as much as their observably similar counterparts, but the effect of changing between 
nonprofit and for-profit employment varies substantially across the three industries. 
 What do these results tell us about wage-setting in the nonprofit sector?  The virtual 
absence of nonprofit wage penalty, after controlling for industry, suggests that the scope of labor 
donations to nonprofits by paid employees is limited.  However, movements from nonprofit to 
for-profit jobs are associated with relative wage increases of around 4 percent, raising the 
possibility of modest amounts of donated labor.  Differences in worker quality or philanthropic 
wage-setting are also unlikely to predominate in explaining the observed patterns of pay.  If 
lower nonprofit wages resulted from the use of poor quality employees, the differential would be 
robust to the inclusion of industry controls.  And neither explanation predicts wage increases for 
individuals moving from nonprofit to profit-seeking enterprises.  Nevertheless, quality 
  Page 21 
differences or attenuated property rights may be relevant in some sectors.  For instance, nonprofit 
nursing home workers earn more than their peers employed by profit-seekers and experience 
relative wage reductions when switching into for-profit jobs, as predicted by the rent-sharing 
model.  However, the nonprofit premiums do not dissipate when hospital or social service 
workers make similar moves, suggesting that the higher initial wages result from transferable 
individual characteristics rather than the payment of rents. 
 The most important finding is that the low average nonprofit wages reflect the 
concentration of these jobs in low-paying industries.  This could take place because 
disadvantaged groups (such as blacks and women) or low quality workers are selected into these 
sectors.  In this case industry controls would absorb a portion of the “true” nonprofit differential.  
However, this seems unlikely.  Models emphasizing restricted job availability (e.g. Bergmann, 
1974) typically focus on occupations rather than industries and it is not obvious what mechanism 
might limit access to the latter, given the broad set of occupations they employ.  The low wages 
might also occur if nonprofits locate in relatively competitive industries.  Many industries with 
high nonprofit shares are quite competitive, justifying further investigation of the role of market 
structure in determining the patterns of pay.32 
 An alternative explanation is that nonprofit jobs offer low pay because they are prevalent 
in industries offering positive compensating differentials.  If for-profit positions in the same 
industries provide similar compensating differentials, no pay gap would be anticipated once 
industries are controlled for.  The relatively small wage changes associated with moves between 
                                                 
32  Four-firm sales concentration ratios in the nursing/personal care facility and social service industries 
were 14.8, and 7.9 percent in 1992 (Bureau of the Census, 1995).  For comparison, Scherer and Ross 
(1990) indicate four-firm sales concentration ratios of 20 percent or higher for more than 80 percent of 
U.S. manufacturing industries in 1982.  However, the relevant market is likely to be more localized for 
service than manufacturing industries, so this comparison may overstate the competitiveness of the 
  Page 22 
nonprofit and profit-seeking employers might then occur because job changers typically remain 
in the same industry or move to ones offering similar nonwage benefits. 
 Most obviously, nonprofits could disproportionately be represented in industries 
performing “socially desirable” activities (e.g. helping the sick), resulting in a willingness of 
workers to accept reduced compensation.  This represents a variation of the labor donation 
hypothesis.  However, the key distinction is that individuals care not about the type of the 
employer but rather about the goods or services they provide.  When estimating the “pure” effect 
of nonprofit status, as distinct from other specific attributes of the employer, it is therefore 
appropriate to include industry controls. 
 Another reason for lower weekly wages is that nonprofit employees work fewer hours 
than their counterparts.  An examination of work hours reveals the exact pattern hypothesized 
above.  Specifically, in a cross-sectional equation (estimated by OLS) nonprofit employment is 
associated with a 1.7 per week reduction in work hours (with a standard error of .2 hours), 
holding constant individual characteristics.  Controlling for industries reduces the differential to 
0.4 hours, and switchs from for-profit to nonprofit employment (between years 1 and 2) are 
predicted to decrease them by just 0.2 work hours per week. 
 Direct evidence on other compensating differentials is difficult to obtain.  DuMond 
(1997) indicates that pension and health insurance coverage (displacement rates) are relatively 
high (low) for persons employed by nonprofit enterprises.  This is consistent with the existence 
of positive compensating differentials and makes it doubtful that nonprofits pay less because 
they locate in more competitive sectors.  However, his analysis is not definitive since it does not 
                                                                                                                                                             
sectors dominated by nonprofits.  The four-firm concentration ratio is much higher for hospitals (47.7 
percent) but this industry also pays relatively well. 
  Page 23 
control for individual characteristics or the industry of employment.33  Finally, Gonyea (1999) 
argues that nonprofit employers may be more sensitive to work-family issues, although the 
evidence cited supporting this position is quite limited. 
                                                 
33 The March Current Population Survey Annual Demographic file, used by DuMond, does not identify 
the job providing the fringe benefits.  This is problematic for persons holding multiple positions or 
changing employers during the year. 
  Page 24 
References 
Belman, Dale and John S. Heywood, “Job Attributes and Federal Wage Differentials” Industrial 
Relations, 32(1), Winter 1993, 148-157. 
 
Bergmann, Barbara R., “Occupational Segregation, Wages, and Profits When Employers 
Discriminate by Race or Sex” Eastern Economic Journal, 1(2), April-July 1974, 103-110. 
 
Borjas, George J., H.E. Frech III, Paul B. Ginsburg, “Property Rights and Wages: The Case of 
Nursing Homes” Journal of Human Resources, 17(2), 1983, 231-246. 
 
Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States 1998, U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, October 1998 (Table 1286). 
 
Bureau of the Census. 1992 Census of Service Industries, “Establishment and Firm Size”, SC92-
S-1.  Washington, D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office, May 1995.  (Downloaded from: 
http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/concentration.html, 9/14/99.) 
 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business, U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Economics and Statistics Administration, August 1999 (Table 1.7). 
 
DuMond, J. Michael. Wage Tradeoffs: An Analysis of the Nonprofit Sector and Local Amenities, 
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Florida State University, May 1997. 
 
Easley, David and Maureen O’Hara. “The Economic Role of the Nonprofit Firm”, Bell Journal 
of Economics, 14, August 1983, 531-538. 
 
Feldstein, Martin S. The Rising Cost of Hospital Care.  Information Services Press: Washington, 
D.C., 1971 
 
Frank, Richard G. and David S. Salkever. “Nonprofit Organizations in the Health Sector”, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(4), fall 1994, 129-144. 
 
Frank, Robert H. “What Price the Moral High Ground?”, Southern Economic Journal, 63, July 
1996, 1-17. 
 
Frech III, H.E. “The Property Rights Theory of the Firm: Empirical Estimates from a Natural 
Experiment”, Journal of Political Economy 84(1), 1976, 143-152. 
 
Goddeeris, John H. “Compensating Differentials and Self-Selection: An Application to 
Lawyers”, Journal of Political Economy, 96(2), 1988, 411-428. 
 
Gonyea, Judith G. “The Nonprofit Sector’s Responsiveness to Work-Family Issues” Annuals of 
the Academy of Political and Social Science, 562(0), March 1999, 127-142. 
 
Handy, Femida and Eliakim Katz.  “The Wage Differential Between Nonprofit Institutions and 
Corporations: Getting More By Paying Less”, Journal of Comparative Economics 26, 1998, 
246-61. 
  Page 25 
 
Hansmann, Henry B. “The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise” The Yale Law Journal 89(5), April 
1980, 835-901. 
 
Hodgkinson, Virginia Ann, Murray S. Weitzman, John A. Abrahams, Eric A. Crutchfield, and 
David R. Stevenson.  Nonprofit Almanac: 1996-1997.  San Francisco: Jossey-Bass 
Publishers, 1996. 
 
Holtmann, A.G. and Todd L. Idson. “Wage Determination of Registered Nurses in Proprietary 
and Nonprofit Nursing Homes” Journal of Human Resources, 28(1), Winter 1993, 55-79. 
 
Johnston, Denis and Gabriel Rudney. “Characteristics of Workers in Nonprofit Organizations”, 
Monthly Labor Review, 110(7), July 1987, 28-33. 
 
Krueger, Alan B. “Are Public Sector Workers Paid More Than Their Alternative Wage? 
Evidence from Longitudinal Data and Job Queues” in Richard B. Freeman and Casey 
Ichniowski (eds.) When Public Sector Workers Unionize.  Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press (for the National Bureau of Economic Research), 1988, 217-240. 
 
Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-industry Wage 
Structure” Econometrica 56(2), March 1988, 259-293. 
 
Lakdawall, Darius and Tomas Philipson. “Nonprofit Competition and Production” NBER 
Working Paper No. 6377, January 1998. 
 
Leete, Laura. “Whither the Nonprofit Wage Differential? Estimates From the 1990 Census” 
Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming. 
 
MacPherson, David A. and Barry T. Hirsch. “Wages and Gender Composition: Why Do 
Women’s Jobs Pay Less?”, Journal of Labor Economics, 13(3), July 1995, 426-471. 
 
Mocan, Naci H. and Deborah Viola. “The Determinants of Child Care Workers’ Wages and 
Compensation: Sectoral Difference, Human Capital, Race, Insiders and Outsiders” NBER 
Working Paper No. 6328, December 1997. 
 
Moulton, Brent R. “A Reexamination of the Federal-Private Wage Differential in the United 
States”, Journal of Labor Economics, 8(2), April 1990, 270-293. 
 
Newhouse, Joseph P. “Towards a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An Economic Model of a 
Hospital”, American Economic Review, 60, March 1970, 64-74. 
 
Preston, Anne E. “The Effects of Property Rights on Labor Costs of Nonprofit Firms: An 
Application to the Day Care Industry”, Journal of Industrial Economics 36(3), March 1988, 
337-350. 
 
Preston, Anne E. “The Nonprofit Worker in a For-Profit World”, Journal of Labor Economics 
7(4), 1989, 438-463. 
 
  Page 26 
Preston, Anne E. “Women in the White-Collar Nonprofit Sector: The Best Option or the Only 
Option?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(4), November 1990, 560-568. 
 
Roomkin, Myron J. and Burton A. Weisbrod. “Managerial Compensation and Incentives in For-
Profit and Nonprofit Hospitals”, The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15(3), 
October 1999, 750-781. 
 
Rose-Ackerman, Susan. “Altruism, Nonprofits, and Economic Theory”, Journal of Economic 
Literature, 34(2), June 1996, 701-728. 
 
Scherer, F.M. and David Ross. Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance, 3rd 
Edition.  Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1990. 
 
Shackett, Joyce R. and Trapani, John M. “Earnings Differentials and Market Structure” Journal 
of Human Resources, 22(4), Fall 1987, 518-531. 
 
Steinberg, Richard. “Labor Economics and the Nonprofit Sector: A Literature Review”, 
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 19(2), Summer 1990, 151-169. 
 
Weisbrod, Burton A. “Nonprofit and Proprietary Sector Behavior: Wage Differentials Among 
Lawyers”, Journal of Labor Economics, 1(3), 1983, 246-263. 
 
Weisbrod, Burton A. The Nonprofit Economy.  Cambridge, MA:  Harvard University Press, 
1988.  
 
  Page 27 
Appendix A:  Construction of Longitudinal Sample from the ORG Files 
Households participate in the CPS for four months, followed by eight months out of the 
sample and then four final months in it.  The outgoing rotation groups include respondents in the 
final months of each of the two periods (denoted years 1 and 2).  The CPS contains household 
identifiers (ID codes) and record line numbers but not individual codes.  Individuals from the 
same month in consecutive years can potentially be identified using the household ID codes and 
record line numbers.  The household ID represents a permanent residence and does not follow 
families that relocate.  The coding of the ID variable was changed from 12 to 15 characters in 
July of 1995, implying that households whose ORG months crossed this date could not be 
matched.  Also, since different states sometimes use the same household ID, state (FIPS) codes 
are needed to uniquely identify the household. 
The following procedure was used to create the ORG matched panel data set.  First, 
individual cross-sectional data sets were created for each of the years 1994 through 1998.  The 
samples were restricted to non-self employed persons working for pay and aged 25 through 55.  
Second, the five annual data sets were merged and persons in time periods that were not 
potentially matchable, because of changes in coding the household ID, were deleted.  This 
yielded a sample with 333,134 person-year observations, including 165,516 for year 1 and 
167,618 at year 2.  The sample was then sorted by year, month, household ID, state, and record 
line.  Several passes of the data were then used to limit the sample to cases where consecutive 
observations were one year apart and had the same calendar month, household ID, state code, 
and record line.  This reduced the sample to 236,122 observations.  To further insure that the 
matched observations referred to the same individual, we deleted cases where there was a change 
(between year 1 and 2) in sex or race, or more than a two year difference in age.  (A two year age 
difference was allowed because the surveys could take place on different days of the month.)  
  Page 28 
Finally, the matched pair was deleted if the first (second) observation was listed as the eighth 
(fourth) month in sample, rather than the reverse.  These restrictions reduced the sample to 
107,422 individuals (214,844 person-year observations), corresponding to 64.5 percent of the 
original sample and 64.9 percent of year 1 observations. 
  Page 29 
Appendix B 
Table B.1:  Variable Means for Alternative Samples 
 
Variable 
 
Cross-Section 
 
Panel 
 
Job Losers 
 
Employment Sector 
   
    Profit .764 .742 .903 
    Nonprofit .057 .061 .033 
    Government .179 .197 .064 
Industry    
    Religious Organizations .007 .007 .002 
    Social Services .022 .021 .012 
    Hospitals .051 .056 .019 
    Higher Education .025 .025 .015 
    Nursing/Personal Care Facilities .015 .014 .006 
    Other Professional .072 .073 .071 
    Primary/Secondary Education .067 .075 .018 
Occupation    
    Health Professional .042 .045 .025 
    Health Technician .016 .018 .007 
    Educator .064 .070 .024 
    Other Professional .207 .215 .200 
    Administrative Support .156 .164 .157 
    Service Worker .118 .106 .086 
Weekly Earnings/Hours    
    Earnings $581 $598 $527 
    Work Hours 40.5 40.7  
Education    
    High School Dropout .097 .082 .103 
    High School Graduate .331 .330 .328 
    Some College .281 .286 .323 
    College Graduate .198 .204 .181 
    Graduate Degree .093 .097 .064 
Marital Status    
    Currently Married .655 .700 .614 
    Never Married .185 .158 .203 
Race/Ethnicity    
    Black .120 .112 .094 
    Other Nonwhite .045 .041 .043 
    Hispanic .097 .085 .101 
Other Characteristics    
    Age (years) 38.7 39.3 .376 
    Male .524 .518 .580 
    Metropolitan Residence .776 .822 .830 
 
Sample Size 
 
301,208 
 
107,422 
 
5,381 
  Page 30 
Note:  See notes on Tables 1 and 2.  All variable means are computed using CPS sampling 
weights.  The cross-section includes respondents in year 1 of the 1994-1998 Current Populatoin 
Survey Outgoing Rotation Groups.  The panel includes respondents for the same period who 
could be matched in the fourth months of years 1 and 2.  Job losers include respondents to the 
1994, 1996, and 1998 Displaced Worker Supplements to the February CPS for whom data were 
available on weekly wages in the predisplacement job and at the survey date.  For the cross-
section and panel samples, all variables are measured at year 1.  For job losers, the means are for 
the survey date, except weekly wages and the sector, industry, and occupation of employment, 
where they refer to the predisplacement job. 
  Page 31 
 
Figure 1:  Previous Research on Nonprofit Earnings Differentials 
Study Data Results Comments 
Borjas 
Frech III, 
and 
Ginsburg 
(1983)  
1973-74 National 
Nursing Home 
Survey 
Nursing home workers in religious-
affiliated nonprofits earn 4% less per 
than those in for-profits; those in other 
nonprofits receive an insignificant 1.6% 
premium.  Some evidence of higher 
wages for homes with more generous 
Medicaid reimbursement programs. 
Many results are 
statistically insignificant 
or sensitive to the choice 
of specifications. 
DuMond 
(1997) 
1995 Current 
Population Survey 
Outgoing Rotation 
Groups 
Nonprofit workers earn 6% (11%) less 
per hour than counterparts without (with) 
controls for industry and occupation.  
Larger differential for males (19%) than 
females (0% to 5%). Gaps shrink to a 
insignificant 0% to 4% in first-difference 
models.  Nonprofit workers have higher 
pension/ health insurance coverage, 
lower displacement rates. 
Not clear how 
government workers are 
treated.  Limited sample 
for wage change models. 
Frank 
(1996) 
Cornell 
Employment 
Survey and other 
sources. 
Nonprofit differential in annual earnings 
was –59% for recent Cornell graduates, 
controlling for sex, GPA, and college 
curriculum.  Other evidence of negative 
compensating differentials for working 
for socially responsible employers. 
Small and 
unrepresentative sample 
in main analysis; few 
controls. 
Goddeeris 
(1988) 
Nationally 
representative 
surveys of private 
and public interest 
lawyers in 1973/4. 
Public Interest (PIL) lawyers earn 37% 
less than those in private firms but this is 
entirely due to differences in 
characteristics.  They would earn no less 
if they switched into the private sector.  
Sector definitions differ 
from Weisbrod (1983).  
Selection identified by 
community size, political 
activities/orientation. 
Holtmann 
and Idson 
(1993) 
Registered nurses 
in 1985 National 
Nursing Home 
Survey 
Nonprofits employ higher quality RNs.  
OLS models reveal a 3% hourly wage 
premium for RNs in nonprofit homes and 
steeper experience/tenure profiles for 
them.  However, selectivity-corrected 
models indicate that RNs in nonprofits 
actually earn less than they would if 
employed in for-profits. 
No distinction between 
government and private 
nonprofit nursing homes.  
Identification restrictions 
of selectivity-corrected 
models are questionable. 
Johnston 
and Rudney 
(1987) 
1982 Census of 
Service Industries 
The average annual earnings of nonprofit 
workers are 21.5% less than those 
employed in for-profit firms. 
Hospitals, educational 
institutions, and religious 
organizations excluded.  
No controls for individual 
characteristics. 
Leete 
(forth-
coming) 
1990 Census, Five 
Percent Public 
Use Microdata 
Sample  
No overall nonprofit wage differential 
after including detailed controls for 
industry and occupation.  Among 
specified 3-digit industries with 
statistically significant nonprofit 
differentials, positive and negative 
effects are equally likely.  
Estimated hourly wages 
may be subject to 
measurement error.  
Extremely detailed 
industry-occupation 
interactions could absorb 
nonprofit effects. 
  Page 32 
Figure 1 (continued) 
Mocan and 
Viola 
(1997) 
398 child care 
centers in CA, 
CO, CT, and NC 
Nonprofit child care workers receive a 
statistically insignificant 4% premium in 
hourly wages; considerable variation by 
type of nonprofit and worker. 
Extensive controls for 
human capital, center 
characteristics. 
Preston 
(1988) 
Abt Associates, 
1976-77 National 
Day Care Center 
Supply Study 
Nonprofit weekly wage premium of 5% 
to 10% for child care workers in 
federally regulated day care centers; no 
difference for other centers.  Results 
consistent with the former being less 
competitive and able to pay rents to 
workers. 
Center characteristics, 
labor quality, parental 
participation, and 
donations controlled for. 
Some differences across 
center types could persist. 
Preston 
(1989) 
1990 Survey of 
Job Characteris-
tics (SJC); May 
1979 Current 
Population Survey 
(CPS) 
OLS results for SJC imply negative 
nonprofit differential of ≈20% for 
managers/professionals, no effect for 
clerical workers; larger negative effects 
for both groups in CPS.  Selectivity- 
corrected results sensitive to model 
estimated.  CPS wage change regressions 
indicate no differential for clerical 
workers, statistically insignificant 10% 
premium for managers and professionals.  
For-profit workers more often have 
pensions, health insurance. 
SJC sample is small 
(n≈300).  Exclusion 
restrictions are 
questionable for 
selectivity-corrected 
estimates.  Nonprofit 
status inferred (not 
observed) in CPS data. 
Roomkin 
and 
Weisbrod 
(1999) 
Hay Management 
Consultants, 1992 
Hospital 
Compensation 
Survey 
Nonprofit hospitals offer higher base 
salaries but lower bonus payments to six 
top managerial positions.  Total 
compensation is higher in three and 
lower in the other three. 
Job complexity,hospital 
characteristics controlled 
for; individual character-
istics are not.  Low survey 
response rate (19%).  
Shackett 
and Tapani 
(1987) 
National 
Longitudinal 
Surveys of Young 
Men and Young 
Women 
Compared to private nonregulated 
industries, the nonprofit wage 
differential is 11, 0, -14, and –8 percent 
for white females, black females, white 
males, and black males. 
Nonprofit status not 
observed; instead it is 
assumed to include all 
persons in hospital and 
educational services 
industries. 
Weisbrod 
(1983) 
Same as 
Goddeeris (1988) 
PIL lawyers earn 20% less annually than 
if employed in private sector.  These 
attorneys are aware of the negative 
earnings effects and expect them to be 
permanent.  Differences in preferences 
consistent with type of employment. 
Small sample size (53 PIL 
lawyers); PIL lawyers 
may not be representative 
of other attorneys in 
nonprofits.  Work hours 
and fringe benefits not 
controlled for. 
  Page 33 
 
Table 1:  Industry Composition of Nonprofit Employment 
 
Industry Share 
of Employment: 
 
% of Industry 
Employment in:  
 
 
 
Industry  
 
Overall 
 
(a) 
 
Non-
profits 
 
(b) 
 
Non-
profits  
 
(c) 
 
For-
profits 
 
(d) 
 
Religious Organizations (880) 
 
   0.7% 
 
  10.4% 
 
   85.1% 
 
   14.9% 
 
Social Services (861-871) 2.2 15.1 39.6 
 
37.1 
 
Hospitals (831) 5.1 29.9 33.5 
 
49.9 
 
Higher Education (850-860) 2.5 8.1 18.3 
 
21.8 
 
Nursing/Personal Care Facilities (832) 1.5 3.5 13.4 76.8 
 
Other Professional (812-830,840,873,881-893) 7.2 13.0 10.3 
 
83.4 
 
Primary/Secondary Education (842) 6.7 8.6 7.3 
 
7.1 
 
Finance/Insurance/Real Estate (700-712) 6.9 3.5 2.9 
 
93.9 
 
Personal/Business Services (721-791) 8.3 1.8 1.2 
 
97.8 
 
Transportation/Communication/Utilities (400-472) 8.3 1.5 1.0 
 
79.5 
 
Wholesale/Retail Trade (500-691) 17.0 1.3 0.4 
 
99.0 
 
Agriculture/Mining/Construction (10-60) 7.4 0.5 0.4 
 
92.4 
 
Manufacturing (100-392) 19.0 1.1 0.3 
 
99.2 
 
Public Administration (900-932) 5.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 
 
All Industries 
 
100.0 
 
100.0 
 
5.7 
 
 
76.4 
 
 
Note:  Data are from the 1994-1998 Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Groups for 
persons in their fourth interview month (n=301,208); means are calculated using CPS sampling 
weights.  The numbers in parentheses refer to three digit census industries. 
 
  Page 34 
 
 
Table 2:  Occupation Composition of Nonprofit Employment 
 
Occupation Share 
of Employment:  
 
% of Occupation 
Employment in: 
 
 
 
Occupation  
 
Overall 
 
(a) 
 
Non-
profits 
 
(b) 
 
Non-
profits  
 
(c) 
 
For-
Profits 
 
(d) 
 
Health Professional (15, 83-106) 
 
   4.2% 
 
   18.5% 
 
   25.4% 
 
 
   58.2% 
 
Health Technician (203-208) 1.6 5.0 17.5 
 
70.5 
 
Educator (14, 113-165) 6.4 13.7 12.3 
 
16.8 
 
Other Professional (4-13, 17-79, 173-199) 20.7 26.7 7.4 
 
75.6 
 
Administrative Support (303-389) 15.6 16.1 5.9 
 
70.1 
 
Service Worker (403-469) 11.8 11.7 5.7 
 
68.9 
 
Farming/Fishing/Forestry (473-499) 1.4 0.6 2.5 
 
88.5 
Non-Health Technician (209-235) 2.2 0.9 2.3 
 
82.6 
 
Handlers/Cleaners/Laborers (863-889) 3.5 0.8 1.2 
 
92.4 
 
Production/Craft/Repair (503-799) 18.3 3.4 1.1 
 
94.1 
 
Sales (243-285) 9.9 1.8 1.0 
 
97.6 
 
Transportation (803-859) 4.4 0.7 0.9 
 
88.1 
 
All Occupations 100.0 100.0 5.7 
 
76.4 
 
 
Note:  See note on Table 1.  The numbers in parentheses refer to three digit census occupations.
  Page 35 
 
Table 3: 
Weekly Wages and Demographic Characteristics By Sector of Employment 
 
Industry/Characteristic 
 
Profit 
 
Nonprofit 
 
Government 
 
 
Weekly Earnings ($) 
 
   
Full Sample $573 
($1) 
$557 
($3) 
$621 
($2) 
Industry 
 
   
   Social Services $359 
($5) 
$422 
($6) 
$468 
($7) 
   Hospitals $572 
($4) 
$636 
($5) 
$609 
($7) 
   Nursing Facilities $360 
($4) 
$412 
($9) 
$424 
($11) 
   Education $547 
($7) 
$602 
($7) 
$597 
($2) 
   Other Professional $662 
($3) 
$617 
($8) 
$589 
($10) 
Occupation 
 
   
   Health Professional $762 
($5) 
$767 
($7) 
$761 
($9) 
   Health Technician $487 
($4) 
$513 
($8) 
$550 
($2) 
   Educator $556 
($7) 
$594 
($8) 
$721 
($3) 
   Other Professional $864 
($2) 
$647 
($6) 
$774 
($4) 
 
Demographic Characteristics 
 
   
Education 
 
   
      High School Dropout .116 .039 .035 
      High School Graduate .363 .189 .236 
      Some College .283 .290 .269 
      College Graduate .178 .273 .258 
      Graduate Degree .060 .210 .201 
 
 
(Table continues on next page) 
  Page 36 
Table 3 (continued) 
 
 
Marital Status 
 
   
      Currently Married .649 .649 .683 
      Never Married .190 .199 .161 
 
Race/Ethnicity 
 
   
      Black .110 .111 .162 
      Other Nonwhite .046 .035 .042 
      Hispanic .107 .045 .073 
 
Other Characteristics 
 
   
      Age (years) 38.2 39.8 40.7 
      Male .559 .306 .445 
      Metropolitan Residence .780 .787 .753 
      Weekly Work Hours 40.9 38.2 39.7 
 
Note:  The top panel of the table shows average weekly earnings on the main job for respondents 
in year 1 of the 1994-1998 Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Groups, with standard 
errors in parentheses.  The bottom panel shows mean values of selected demographic 
characteristics.  CPS sampling weights are used in calculating all variable means. 
 
  Page 37 
 
Table 4:  Cross-sectional Estimates of Nonprofit Weekly Earnings Differential 
 
Group 
Sample 
Size 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
 
(e) 
 
All 
 
299,405 
 
-.122 
(.005) 
 
-.018 
(.005) 
 
-.148 
(.004) 
 
-.036 
(.005) 
 
.011 
(.004) 
 
Males 153,065 -.217 
(.007) 
-.055 
(.009) 
-.217 
(.007) 
-.047 
(.008) 
-.033 
(.008) 
 
Females 146,340 -.069 
(.006) 
.008 
(.006) 
-.120 
(.006) 
-.035 
(.006) 
.032 
(.005) 
 
No College 126,106 -.160 
(.009) 
-.044 
(.010) 
-.136 
(.009) 
-.070 
(.009) 
6.9E-4 
(.009) 
 
Attended College 173,299 -.118 
(.005) 
-.017 
(.006) 
-.154 
(.005) 
-.027 
(.006) 
.006 
(.005) 
 
Whites 254,029 -.135 
(.005) 
-.029 
(.006) 
-.159 
(.005) 
-.042 
(.005) 
.002 
(.005) 
 
Blacks 29,455 -.016 
(.014) 
.064 
(.015) 
-.044 
(.014) 
.031 
(.015) 
.072 
(.014) 
 
Hispanics 23,409 -.071 
(.021) 
.030 
(.024) 
-.109 
(.021) 
-7.5E-4 
(.023) 
.058 
(.021) 
Additional Controls 
 
      
   Industry  No Yes No Yes Yes 
   Occupation  No No Yes Yes No 
   Weekly Work Hours  No No No No Yes 
 
Note:  The table shows the coefficient on a dummy variable indicating nonprofit status from a 
series of regressions where the dependent variable is the natural log of weekly earnings for the 
cross-sectional sample (in year 1).  The equations also control for age and age squared, marital 
status (currently married and never married), race/ethnicity (black, Hispanic), education (high 
school graduate, some college, college graduate, post-graduate education), metropolitan 
residence, the survey year, and government employment. Columns (b), (d), and (e) add 
covariates for seven industry categories (hospitals, nursing/personal care facilities, social 
services, other professional, religious organizations, primary/secondary education, higher 
education); specifications (c) and (d) include dummy variables for six occupation categories 
(non-health professional, health professional, administrative support, educator, service worker, 
health technician); model (e) also controls for the number of hours worked per week.  Standard 
errors are in parentheses. 
  Page 38 
 
Table 5: 
Average Changes in Log Wages As A Function of Employment Status in Years 1 and 2 
  
All 
 
PN →  
 
NP→  
 
All 
 
.062 
[106,633] 
 
.100 
[1,224] 
 
.050 
[1,087] 
 
Males .059 
[54,039] 
.156 
[379] 
.007 
[321] 
 
Females .066 
[52,593] 
.073 
[845] 
.069 
[766] 
 
No College .055 
[41,914] 
.124 
[330] 
.027 
[309] 
 
Attended College .067 
[64,719] 
.092 
[894] 
.060 
[778] 
 
Whites .062 
[91,865] 
.105 
[1,038] 
.043 
[913] 
 
Blacks .066 
[9,807] 
.058 
[138] 
.059 
[131] 
 
Hispanics .059 
[7,338] 
.173 
[67] 
-.037 
[54] 
 
 
Note:  The table shows (weighted) average changes in log wages, as a function of employment 
status in years 1 and 2 for the ORG panel sample of persons matched in each year.  The first 
column displays the average change in (log) wages between years 1 and 2 for all sample 
members.  The second and third columns indicate corresponding wage changes for persons 
transitioning between the nonprofit and for-profit sectors, over the two years, and changing three 
digit industries or occupations.  Sample sizes are shown in brackets. 
 
  Page 39 
Table 6:  Alternative Estimates of Nonprofit Earnings Differential Using Panel Sample 
 
Group 
  
Wage Level in Year 1 
 Symmetric 
Wage Change 
 Asymmetric 
Wage Change 
 
 
Sample 
Size   
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
  
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
  
PN →  
 
NP→  
 
All 
 
106,633 
  
-.121 
(.007) 
 
-.013 
(.008) 
 
.013 
(.007) 
  
-.026 
(.009) 
 
-.026 
(.009) 
 
-.022 
(.008) 
  
-.035 
(.014) 
 
-.016 
(.014) 
 
Males 54,039  -.222 
(.012) 
-.059 
(.014) 
-.039 
(.013) 
 -.085 
(.016) 
-.082 
(.016) 
-.081 
(.015) 
 -.107 
(.026) 
-.070 
(.026) 
 
Females 52,594  -.067 
(.009) 
.017 
(.010) 
.036 
(.008) 
 7.3E-4 
(.011) 
5.3E-4 
(.011) 
.006 
(.010) 
 .001 
(.017) 
.004 
(.017) 
 
No College 41,914  -.155 
(.014) 
-.026 
(.016) 
.011 
(.014) 
 -.042 
(.017) 
-.045 
(.017) 
-.032 
(.016) 
 -.050 
(.028) 
-.018 
(.028) 
 
Attended College 64,719  -.117 
(.008) 
-.015 
(.009) 
.005 
(.008) 
 -.021 
(.010) 
-.019 
(.011) 
-.018 
(.011) 
 -.030 
(.017) 
-.015 
(.017) 
 
Whites 91,865  -.134 
(.008) 
-.025 
(.009) 
.001 
(.008) 
 -.037 
(.009) 
-.035 
(.009) 
-.033 
(.009) 
 -.043 
(.015) 
-.019 
(.015) 
 
Blacks 9,807  -.019 
(.023) 
.063 
(.025) 
.073 
(.023) 
 .022 
(.029) 
.018 
(.029) 
.022 
(.028) 
 .052 
(.051) 
.027 
(.046) 
 
Hispanics 7,336  -.076 
(.035) 
.056 
(.040) 
.079 
(.036) 
 -.081 
(.039) 
-.086 
(.039) 
-.060 
(.038) 
 -.081 
(.067) 
-.048 
(.063) 
 
  Page 40 
Note:  See notes on table 4.  All specifications include controls for age and age squared, marital status, race/ethnicity, education, 
metropolitan residence, the survey year, and dummy variables indicating employment in government jobs or corresponding transitions 
into or out of government positions.  Column (b) adds controls for the seven industry categories and model (c) also holds constant 
weekly work hours (in the wage levels equations) or the change in work hours (in the change specifications).  The wage level models 
show the nonprofit differential from estimates of: Wi1= Xi1β + Ni1γ + εi1, where Ni1 is a dummy variable indicating whether respondent 
i works for a nonprofit employer in year 2.   The symmetric wage change equations take the form:  Wi2 – Wi1 = Xi2β + (Ni2 – Ni1)γ + 
εi; the table displays γˆ .  The asymmetric specifications are:  Wi2 – Wi1 = Xi2β + NPiγ1 + PNiγ2 + εi, where NPi (PNi) is a dummy 
variable indicating movement nonprofit to for-profit (for-profit to nonprofit) employers between years 1 and 2.  The table displays 
1γˆ−  and 2γˆ  for specification (c), with controls for industry and work hours.
  Page 41 
 
Table 7:  Employment Transitions and Nonprofit Earnings Differentials Among Displaced Workers 
       
Nonprofit Differential 
 
Group  Sample 
Size 
 Transition Hazard Rates  Wage Level 
 
 Wage Changes 
    NN →  PN →  PP→  NP→   (a) (b)  (a) (b) 
 
All 
  
5,381 
  
.285 
 
.571 
 
.919 
 
.030 
  
-.015 
(.044) 
 
.042 
(.051) 
  
-.044 
(.033) 
 
.005 
(.035) 
 
Males  3,055  .199 .642 .940 .020  -.050 
(.075) 
.010 
(.088) 
 -.080 
(.052) 
-.031 
(.055) 
 
Females  2,326  .319 .542 .888 .044  .008 
(.055) 
.052 
(.064) 
 -.015 
(.044) 
.041 
(.046) 
 
No College  2,287  .208 .734 .947 .017  -.074 
(.086) 
7.2E-4 
(.097) 
 -.087 
(.062) 
-.065 
(.065) 
 
Attended College  3,094  .309 .518 .900 .040  -.007 
(.052) 
.050 
(.061) 
 -.022 
(.040) 
.036 
(.042) 
 
Whites  4,734  .274 .580 .923 .030  -.014 
(.047) 
.045 
(.054) 
 -.049 
(.035) 
.001 
(.037) 
 
Blacks  409  .300 .558 .875 .034  -.076 
(.141) 
-.027 
(.176) 
 .038 
(.106) 
.038 
(.106) 
 
Hispanics  444  .039 .961 .951 .026  .187 
(.203) 
.148 
(.224) 
 -.065 
(.105) 
-.028 
(.128) 
 
  Page 42 
Notes:  See notes on tables 4 and 6.  Data are for job losers from the 1994, 1996, and 1998 Displaced Worker Supplements to the 
February CPS who report weekly wages in both the pre- and post-displacement jobs.  The transition hazard rates indicate the 
probability of holding a specified type of post-displacement employment conditional on the class of the predisplacement job (e.g. 
NN →  indicates the probability of working in a nonprofit job at the survey date conditional on having worked for a nonprofit 
employer prior to displacement).  These probabilities are calculated using DWS sampling weights.   The wage level models show γˆ  
from estimates of: Wid = Xiβ + Nidγ + εi, where the subscript d indicates the predisplacement job; (these are predisplacement 
differentials).  The wage change equations take the form:  Wis – Wid = Xiβ + (Nis – Nid)γ + εi, where the s subscript indicates the 
survey date and all of the covariates refer to values at this date; the table displays γˆ . All of the models also control for age and age 
squared, marital status, race/ethnicity, education, metropolitan residence, the survey year, and government employment. Specification 
(b) includes controls for the industry of employment, whereas specification (a) does not. 
 
  Page 43 
 
Table 8:  Nonprofit Earnings Differentials for Specific Industries 
 
   
Wage Levels in Year 1 
 
   
Cross-sectional Data Set 
  
Panel Data Set 
 
 
 
Wage Changes 
(Industry Stayers Only) 
 
Industry 
  
Sample 
Size 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
  
Sample 
Size 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
  
Sample 
Size 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
 
Hospitals 
  
15,660 
 
.041 
(.009) 
 
.032 
(.008) 
  
6,116 
 
.063 
(.014) 
 
.055 
(.013) 
 
  
5,168 
 
5.2E-4 
(.023) 
 
-.003 
(.022) 
Nursing Facilities  4,699 .022 
(.021) 
.049 
(.018) 
 1,583 .022 
(.036) 
.038 
(.030) 
 
 1,111 .167 
(.066) 
.164 
(.061) 
Social Services  6,646 .038 
(.018) 
.108 
(.015) 
 2,279 .040 
(.031) 
.093 
(.024) 
 1,427 -.042 
(.044) 
-.044 
(.041) 
 
Notes:  See notes on Tables 4 and 6.  The wage levels are calculated for year 1.  Wages changes refer to the panel data set for persons 
remaining in the same industry in years 1 and 2.  All specifications include controls for age and age squared, marital status, 
race/ethnicity, education, metropolitan residence, the survey year, and dummy variables indicating employment in government jobs.  
Specification (b) also holds constant weekly work hours or changes in hours. 

