U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON : 66–992 CC 2001
CORPORATE TAX SHELTERS
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ONE HUNDRED SIXTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
NOVEMBER 10, 1999
Serial 106–85
Printed for the use of the Committee on Ways and Means
(
For sale by the U.S. Government Printing Office
Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Sales Office, Washington, DC 20402
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 5011 Sfmt 5011 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
ii
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
BILL ARCHER, Texas, Chairman
PHILIP M. CRANE, Illinois
BILL THOMAS, California
E. CLAY SHAW, JR., Florida
NANCY L. JOHNSON, Connecticut
AMO HOUGHTON, New York
WALLY HERGER, California
JIM MCCRERY, Louisiana
DAVE CAMP, Michigan
JIM RAMSTAD, Minnesota
JIM NUSSLE, Iowa
SAM JOHNSON, Texas
JENNIFER DUNN, Washington
MAC COLLINS, Georgia
ROB PORTMAN, Ohio
PHILIP S. ENGLISH, Pennsylvania
WES WATKINS, Oklahoma
J.D. HAYWORTH, Arizona
JERRY WELLER, Illinois
KENNY HULSHOF, Missouri
SCOTT MCINNIS, Colorado
RON LEWIS, Kentucky
MARK FOLEY, Florida
CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York
FORTNEY PETE STARK, California
ROBERT T. MATSUI, California
WILLIAM J. COYNE, Pennsylvania
SANDER M. LEVIN, Michigan
BENJAMIN L. CARDIN, Maryland
JIM MCDERMOTT, Washington
GERALD D. KLECZKA, Wisconsin
JOHN LEWIS, Georgia
RICHARD E. NEAL, Massachusetts
MICHAEL R. MCNULTY, New York
WILLIAM J. JEFFERSON, Louisiana
JOHN S. TANNER, Tennessee
XAVIER BECERRA, California
KAREN L. THURMAN, Florida
LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
A.L. SINGLETON, Chief of Staff
JANICE MAYS, Minority Chief Counsel
Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public hearing records
of the Committee on Ways and Means are also published in electronic form. The printed
hearing record remains the official version. Because electronic submissions are used to
prepare both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process of converting
between various electronic formats may introduce unintentional errors or omissions. Such occur-
rences are inherent in the current publication process and should diminish as the process
is further refined.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 0486 Sfmt 0486 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
iii
C O N T E N T S
Page
Advisories announcing the hearing ........................................................................ 2
WITNESSES
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Jonathan Talisman, Acting Assistant Sec-
retary for Tax Policy ............................................................................................ 24
Joint Committee on Taxation, Lindy Paull, Chief of Staff ................................... 37
American Bar Association, and Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe, Paul J. Sax ..... 60
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, David A. Lifson ................. 68
BellSouth Corporation, and Tax Executives Institute, Inc., Charles W.
Shewbridge, III ..................................................................................................... 73
Doggett, Hon. Lloyd, a Representative in Congress from the State of Texas .... 8
Hariton, David P., Sullivan & Cromwell ............................................................... 124
Kansas City Southern Industries, Inc., Danny R. Carpenter .............................. 135
New York State Bar Association, Harold R. Handler ........................................... 86
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Kenneth J. Kies ............................................................ 101
Tax Analysts, Martin A. Sullivan ........................................................................... 126
SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD
Association of the Bar of the City of New York, Andrew H. Braiterman,
letter and attachment .......................................................................................... 152
Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company, Springfield, MA, statement .. 160
Millman, Stephen L., New York, NY, and Steven C. Salch, Houston, TX,
Fulbright & Jaworski L.L.P., statement ............................................................ 161
Washington Counsel, P.C., and Tax Fairness Coalition, statement .................... 166
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 0486 Sfmt 0486 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 0486 Sfmt 0486 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
(1)
CORPORATE TAX SHELTERS
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1999
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:00 a.m., in room
1100, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Bill Archer (Chair-
man of the Committee) presiding.
[The advisories announcing the hearing follow:]
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
2ADVISORY
FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
CONTACT: (202) 225–1721FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
October 26, 1999
FC–14
Archer Announces Hearing on Corporate Tax
Shelters
Congressman Bill Archer (R–TX), Chairman of the Committee on Ways and
Means, today announced that the Committee will hold a hearing on corporate tax
shelters. The hearing will take place on Wednesday, November 10, 1999, in
the main Committee hearing room, 1100 Longworth House Office Building,
beginning at 10:00 a.m.
Oral testimony at this hearing will be from both invited and public witnesses. In-
vited witnesses will include representatives of the U.S. Department of the Treasury
and the Joint Committee on Taxation. Also, any individual or organization not
scheduled for an oral appearance may submit a written statement for consideration
by the Committee or for inclusion in the printed record of the hearing.
BACKGROUND:
Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Reform and Restructuring Act
(P.L. 105–206) required the Joint Committee on Taxation and the Treasury to each
conduct a separate study reviewing the interest and penalty provisions of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code, and make any legislation and administrative recommendations
deemed appropriate to simplify penalty administration and reduce taxpayer burden,
by July 22, 1999. On July 1, 1999, the Treasury released a ‘‘white paper’’ on cor-
porate tax shelter penalties and related issues, but did not deliver the broader pen-
alty and interest study. The Joint Committee on Taxation issued its recommenda-
tions on penalties and interest and corporate tax shelters on July 22, 1999. On July
13, Chairman Archer announced his intention to hold a hearing on corporate tax
shelters after the Treasury had completed its penalty and interest study. That
study, including additional recommendations which could affect corporate tax shel-
ters, was received yesterday. There is little agreement as to the definition or extent
of corporate tax shelters, or the proper governmental response to them. The hearing
will address the various policy issues related to corporate tax shelters as well as
possible administrative or legislative responses.
In announcing the hearing, Chairman Archer stated: ‘‘This hearing is the latest
in the Committee’s efforts to stop abusive tax shelters. Due to actions taken by Con-
gress since 1995, we have stopped $50 billion in tax abuses. The IRS has won case
after case in tax court using the very tools Congress already provided. Now, our
challenge is to focus efforts on stopping abuses while properly restraining new blan-
ket authorities for the IRS that might chill legitimate business transactions. This
hearing continues the Committee’s efforts to strike the proper balance in addressing
the problems presented by corporate tax shelters.’’
FOCUS OF THE HEARING:
The hearing will focus on (1) the nature and scope of the perceived corporate tax
shelter problem, (2) the manner in which the IRS and the courts are currently ad-
dressing corporate tax shelters, (3) additional steps the Administration could take
under current law to address such shelters, (4) additional legislation which might
be necessary to address corporate tax shelters, and, (5) procedures the Administra-
tion has in place or could adopt, or that the Congress could enact, to ensure that
new or existing enforcement tools brought to bear on corporate tax shelters do not
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
3interfere with legitimate business transactions or make more difficult the applica-
tion of an already complex income tax.
DETAILS FOR SUBMISSIONS OF REQUESTS TO BE HEARD:
Requests to be heard at the hearing must be made by telephone to Traci Altman
or Pete Davila at (202) 225–1721 no later than the close of business, Wednesday,
November 3, 1999. The telephone request should be followed by a formal written
request to A.L. Singleton, Chief of Staff, Committee on Ways and Means, U.S.
House of Representatives, 1102 Longworth House Office Building, Washington, D.C.
20515. The staff of the Committee will notify by telephone those scheduled to ap-
pear as soon as possible after the filing deadline. Any questions concerning a sched-
uled appearance should be directed to the Committee staff at (202) 225–1721.
In view of the limited time available to hear witnesses, the Committee
may not be able to accommodate all requests to be heard. Those persons and
organizations not scheduled for an oral appearance are encouraged to submit writ-
ten statements for the record of the hearing. All persons requesting to be heard,
whether they are scheduled for oral testimony or not, will be notified as soon as pos-
sible after the filing deadline.
Witnesses scheduled to present oral testimony are required to summarize briefly
their written statements in no more than five minutes. THE FIVE-MINUTE
RULE WILL BE STRICTLY ENFORCED. The full written statement of each
witness will be included in the printed record, in accordance with House
Rules.
In order to assure the most productive use of the limited amount of time available
to question witnesses, all witnesses scheduled to appear before the Committee are
required to submit 300 copies, along with an IBM compatible 3.5-inch diskette in
WordPerfect 5.1 format, of their prepared statement for review by Members prior
to the hearing. Testimony should arrive at the Committee office, room 1102
Longworth House Office Building, no later than Monday, November 8, 1999.
Failure to do so may result in the witness being denied the opportunity to testify
in person.
WRITTEN STATEMENTS IN LIEU OF PERSONAL APPEARANCE:
Any person or organization wishing to submit a written statement for the printed
record of the hearing should submit six (6) single-spaced copies of their statement,
along with an IBM compatible 3.5-inch diskette in WordPerfect 5.1 format, with their
name, address, and hearing date noted on a label, by the close of business, Wednes-
day, November 24, 1999, to A.L. Singleton, Chief of Staff, Committee on Ways and
Means, U.S. House of Representatives, 1102 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, D.C. 20515. If those filing written statements wish to have their state-
ments distributed to the press and interested public at the hearing, they may de-
liver 200 additional copies for this purpose to the Committee office, room 1102 Long-
worth House Office Building, by close of business the day before the hearing.
FORMATTING REQUIREMENTS:
Each statement presented for printing to the Committee by a witness, any written statement
or exhibit submitted for the printed record or any written comments in response to a request
for written comments must conform to the guidelines listed below. Any statement or exhibit not
in compliance with these guidelines will not be printed, but will be maintained in the Committee
files for review and use by the Committee.
1. All statements and any accompanying exhibits for printing must be submitted on an IBM
compatible 3.5-inch diskette in WordPerfect 5.1 format, typed in single space and may not ex-
ceed a total of 10 pages including attachments. Witnesses are advised that the Committee
will rely on electronic submissions for printing the official hearing record.
2. Copies of whole documents submitted as exhibit material will not be accepted for printing.
Instead, exhibit material should be referenced and quoted or paraphrased. All exhibit material
not meeting these specifications will be maintained in the Committee files for review and use
by the Committee.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
43. A witness appearing at a public hearing, or submitting a statement for the record of a pub-
lic hearing, or submitting written comments in response to a published request for comments
by the Committee, must include on his statement or submission a list of all clients, persons,
or organizations on whose behalf the witness appears.
4. A supplemental sheet must accompany each statement listing the name, company, address,
telephone and fax numbers where the witness or the designated representative may be reached.
This supplemental sheet will not be included in the printed record.
The above restrictions and limitations apply only to material being submitted for
printing. Statements and exhibits or supplementary material submitted solely for
distribution to the Members, the press, and the public during the course of a public
hearing may be submitted in other forms.
Note: All Committee advisories and news releases are available on the World
Wide Web at ‘http://www.waysandmeans.house.gov’’.
The Committee seeks to make its facilities accessible to persons with disabilities.
If you are in need of special accommodations, please call 202–225–1721 or 202–226–
3411 TTD/TTY in advance of the event (four business days notice is requested).
Questions with regard to special accommodation needs in general (including avail-
ability of Committee materials in alternative formats) may be directed to the Com-
mittee as noted above.
f
***NOTICE—CHANGE IN TIME***
ADVISORY
FROM THE COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS
CONTACT: (202) 225–1721FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 5, 1999
No. FC-14-Revised
Time Change for Full Committee Hearing on
Wednesday, November 10, 1999,
on Corporate Tax Shelters
Congressman Bill Archer (R–TX), Chairman of the Committee on Ways and
Means, today announced that the full Committee hearing on corporate tax shelters,
previously scheduled for Wednesday, November 10, 1999, at 10:00 a.m., in the main
Committee hearing room, 1100 Longworth House Office Building, will begin instead
at 11:00 a.m.
All other details for the hearing remain the same. (See full Committee press re-
lease No. FC–14, dated October 26, 1999.)
f
Chairman ARCHER. The Committee will come to order.
The Chair invites all of our guests to take seats.
This morning’s hearing continues on the ongoing efforts of the
Ways and Means Committee since 1995 to address issues relating
to corporate tax shelters and any possible abuses in the Code.
Over the past several years, the Congress has enacted a number
of changes to prevent abusive corporate tax shelters, and those
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
5changes have included specific provisions addressing at least $50
billion of known abuses. They also included general changes requir-
ing the registration of corporate tax shelters and enhancing the
substantial understatement penalties for such shelters.
I have been disappointed that the Treasury Department has
failed to implement the corporate tax shelter registration provi-
sions that it requested in its own budget. I personally believe this
failure is inexcusable and has contributed to the perception that
the government doesn’t care about aggressive corporate tax shel-
ters, and that is simply not the case.
There are a number of other steps that Treasury and the IRS
could take under current law to address the problems of corporate
tax shelters, and I look forward to a discussion of those options. I
also look forward to discussion of potential legislative proposals.
The primary focus of this Committee in considering legislation
and addressing corporate tax shelters will be to ensure that any
new laws we enact do not end up interfering with legitimate busi-
ness transactions or making substantive changes in tax law that
have not been adequately considered through hearings and, fur-
thermore, that we should make every effort not to make the Code
more complex.
Now, maybe that is an oxymoron relative to any income tax code,
I am not sure, but we should make every effort to do that.
With that, I recognize Mr. Rangel for any opening statement that
he might like to make.
Mr. RANGEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am still one of those faithful believers that at some point before
we end this session that we are going to pull the IRS Code up by
the roots. The last 5 years we have heard a lot of talk about how
complicated this system is. And I think you have to agree with me
that no matter what you want to call these provisions that we are
studying today, that in no small part they are responsible for much
of the complexity that we find in the Tax Code, which is merely
treating people differently because of our desire to have an outcome
which we direct by the way we give credits and deductions.
Now I know that Treasury has not done all that it can do. It is
never the case that they do. But we have had recommendations to
stop abusive corporate tax shelters made by the Treasury Depart-
ment and recommendations by the American Bar Association. We
have had magazine articles. And we have certainly had Congress-
man Doggett, who has brought to the attention of the Congress and
the Nation the fact that we have a lot of things in our Tax Code
that should be removed such as tax shelters.
I have a letter here from the National Association of Manufactur-
ers saying that we should attack illegitimate corporate tax loop-
holes. And so this is the eleventh hour. I don’t know what we can
accomplish between now and Christmas, but there must be a rea-
son why we are having this hearing so late in this year.
We did have an opportunity with the $792 billion tax cut to re-
form the system as we decorated the Christmas tree, but it wasn’t
done then. So I don’t know what this hearing is going to do except
to painfully point out what we haven’t done. But being a faithful
soldier, I follow your leadership and congratulate the Chairman for
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
6recognizing that within our corporate tax structure we have tax
shelters that should not exist.
I believe you when you say that we are not going to make dra-
matic changes without hearings and finding out what impact tax
changes would have. When we will do this, I don’t know. But I am
here to find out and to welcome our colleague, Mr. Doggett, and to
thank you for having the hearing before we adjourn tonight.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The opening statement of Mr. Rangel follows:]
Statement of Hon. Charles B. Rangel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York
1. The Committee is finally meeting to discuss the huge problem of abusive cor-
porate tax shelters.
• Unfortunately, this important issue is being addressed by a hearing—not a
markup-at the time the Congress is preparing to adjourn.
• Obviously, Republicans don’t consider corporate tax shelters a serious problem.
If they did, they would have acted by now or at least have a plan.
• There is no question that corporate tax shelter abuse is a widespread and major
problem and could have been solved months ago.
2. Just last week it was reported that corporate tax shelters may be having a sub-
stantial negative impact on corporate tax receipts.
• Corporate tax receipts for fiscal year 1999 were approximately $4 billion less
than for fiscal year 1998—even though corporate profits for 1999 were approxi-
mately $20 billion higher than in 1998.
• The decline in corporate tax receipts in fiscal year 1999 was the first decline
in recent history that was not caused by explicit congressional reductions in cor-
porate taxes or declines in the overall economy.
• Corporate tax receipts as a percentage of corporate profits have steadily de-
clined in recent years from approximately 26.6% in 1994 to 21.8% in 1999.
• This decline has occurred despite the corporate rate increase in the 1993 budget
act and despite net corporate tax increases enacted since 1994.
• If corporate receipts had remained constant as a percentage of corporate profits
since 1994, corporate tax receipts in fiscal year 1999 would have been at least $40
billion higher.
• High among the list of suspected causes for the decline in corporate tax receipts
is the increased use of aggressive corporate tax shelters.
3. Congressman Doggett (the first witness) should be commended for his continued
leadership in highlighting the corporate tax shelter abuse problem and for proposing
a meaningful solution.
• His bill, H.R. 2255, the ‘‘Abusive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act of 1999’’ would dis-
allow tax benefits from transactions without substantial economic substance and in-
crease the penalty for substantial tax understatements.
• His bill is based on the recommendations made by the Treasury Department and
the American Bar Association. While the details of their proposals may vary, their
goal is the same.
4. Over the past six months, Republicans have refused to consider or support cor-
porate tax shelter reforms.
• Some (Archer) have said that Congress needed ‘‘to wait″ for Treasury’s overall
study on interest and penalty reform (released in October 1999.) This was just an
excuse for doing nothing.
• In fact, Treasury’s October interest and penalty report does not address cor-
porate tax shelter abuse.
• Moreover, in July 1999, Treasury issued a comprehensive report on corporate
tax shelter abuse. The Joint Committee on Taxation issued their report on interest,
penalties and tax shelters at the same time. Both reports make recommendations
for legislative action, yet nothing has been done.
• Rather than consider H.R. 2255, or the other proposals made by the tax commu-
nity professionals, the Republicans have chosen to invent ridiculous revenue raising
proposals—such as delaying payment of the Earned Income Tax Credit—which
would hit hardworking Americans who pay highly regressive payroll taxes.
• Obviously it is easier for the Republicans to hit on the working guy, rather than
to attack corporate tax abuse and the peddlers of tax shelter transactions. (The Re-
publicans say they don’t know how EITC beneficiaries spend their money and that
those working families need help managing their financial affairs-maybe it’s time
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
7that the Republicans help corporate lawyers and accountants in ethically managing
their affairs.)
• For the first time in Committee history, failure to act on tax shelters has left
the tax community criticizing the Committee for not acting expeditiously to stamp
out aggressive, abusive corporate tax loopholes.
5. It is unfortunate that we will hear little today about the real facts and players—
who the marketeers of abusive tax shelters are, the effectiveness of their marketing
techniques, the purpose and goal of the deals they cut, the outrageousness of the
transactions being ‘‘peddled,’’ how they get away with it, and the ‘‘big bucks’’ at
stake.
• The recent Forbes magazine cover story titled ‘‘The Hustling of X Rated Shel-
ters’’ documents how the ‘‘Big Five’’ accounting firms and major law firms are com-
peting aggressively to bring the next corporate tax scheme to market.
• Tax professionals are ‘‘cold calling’’ potential corporate clients, offering tax shel-
ter schemes for 10% of the tax savings, and requiring pledges of ‘‘confidentiality.’’
• For example, we understand that a company received unsolicited offers for a tax
shelter scheme after the press reported that the company would have large capital
gains that year.
• The ‘‘peddling’’ of abusive tax breaks to corporations is not only unethical, but
also threatens the heart of our tax system.
6. Under current law, there is a court-developed doctrine that requires trans-
actions to have economic substance in order to be respected for tax purposes.
• H.R. 2255, introduced by Congressman Doggett, codifies the judicial ‘‘economic
substance″ doctrine so that transactions must have potential for profit/risk of loss
and potential profit must be significant in relationship to the tax benefits.
• The ABA, NY State Bar Association, and Treasury support this reform.
7. Also, current law includes an ‘‘accuracy-related’’ penalty for tax understatements
equal to 20%. The penalty does not apply where the taxpayer has reasonable cause
(such as having a legal opinion) to justify the transaction.
• H.R. 2255 would increase the substantial understatement penalty from 20 to 40
% for transactions without substantial economic substance.
• The bill would not allow an easily-obtained legal opinion to protect a sham
transaction or avoid sanctions.
8. The provisions of H.R. 2255 have been used as a revenue offset in Democratic
‘‘substitutes’’ to the 1999 tax cut bill, managed care reform bill, and tax extenders
package.
• JCT estimates that the bill raises $10 billion over 10 years.
f
Chairman ARCHER. I thank the gentleman for his statement.
I am constrained to respond briefly by saying that the gentleman
refers as to his desire to tear the income tax out by the roots and
join me in that effort, and the Chair waits with anticipation for the
gentleman’s endorsement of any plan to do that, even conceptually,
which the Chair has not yet heard. But I hope that that day will
come where the gentleman from New York will endorse some con-
ceptual plan at least, if not in statutory language, in order to ac-
complish that, and we will welcome him joining me in that effort.
As far as not knowing when we will begin to address the cor-
porate tax shelter problem, that is precisely what the Committee
is about today. The when is now.
The Chair is happy not to welcome, because the gentleman is
here almost every day as he is regular in his attendance at Com-
mittee meetings, but to have as our first witness my fellow col-
league from the State of Texas, Mr. Doggett, to tell us about his
proposal to address the corporate tax shelter problem.
Mr. Doggett, we are happy to receive your testimony.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
8STATEMENT OF THE HON. LLOYD DOGGETT, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for your
Texas hospitality and your continual courtesy to me as a brand
new member of this Committee.
Mr. Rangel and members of the Committee, I appreciate the op-
portunity this morning to focus some attention specifically on H.R.
2255, the Abusive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act, that I introduced
back in June, I believe. It is the only legislative proposal pending
in Congress concerning this matter.
And I would simply summarize my written testimony about it
and request that that written testimony be made a part of the
record.
I sincerely believe, Mr. Chairman, that the rampant spread of
corporate tax shelters and our inattention to it in this Congress
represents one of our major shortcomings. The proliferation of abu-
sive corporate tax shelters is costing the Federal treasury literally
billions of dollars.
A professor named Michael Graetz defined a tax shelter in terms
that I could understand it, as saying it is a deal done by very smart
people that, absent tax considerations, would be very stupid.
And when one of these apparently stupid schemes gets shut
down, more seem to blossom, and I think that is not by accident.
One Big Five accounting firm reportedly requires its very smart
staffers to come up with at least one of these economically foolish
but tax wise corporate tax dodge ideas each week.
The literal hustling of improper tax shelters is so commonplace
that one representative of a major Texas-based, multinational cor-
poration reported to my office recently that he gets a cold call every
day from someone hawking these shelters. Some are even called
black box proposals. They are kept under wraps and not even gen-
erally discussed with anyone other than just a few of the select cor-
porate clients.
As a partner at one of these national firms boasted, ‘‘A whale
can’t get harpooned unless it surfaces for air.’’ To me, that is a
rather whale-sized bit of arrogance toward the ordinary taxpayer,
corporate and noncorporate, who is out there trying to comply with
the tax law and honestly file their tax return.
I believe that these taxpayers, businesses and individuals, get hit
in two ways by our failure to address this problem. First, they end
up having to make up the revenues that those who cheat on their
taxes don’t provide; and, second, they have to pay for the very ex-
pensive law enforcement necessary to try to seek compliance.
One of these tax shelter cases that was won this summer cost the
public about $2 million for victory. Amazingly, though we have had
some success, and though this Committee prior to my coming on
it has acted in this area, the fact that there is a victory here or
there doesn’t seem to slow the process of new tax shelters. It seems
to me that these tax shelters get repackaged and remarketed with
creative titles not unlike the sequel to a bad movie. Within months
of the Treasury shutting down LILO transactions, we had some-
thing called ‘‘Son of LILO,’’ and I wouldn’t be surprised if we didn’t
have ‘‘Cousin of LILO’’ already on the drafting board.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
9I have been a member of this Committee, of course, only for a
few months. And I am not a tax lawyer, and I certainly haven’t
mastered all of the various revenue rulings, circulars and tax court
decisions. But since being contacted by an Austin constituent back
in the spring on this problem, what has impressed me most, other
than the size of the problem, is the fact that there really seems to
be not so much disagreement but rather a consensus that has been
voiced by just about all observers that there is a problem, and that
the Congress needs to act now, because it affects confidence of both
of our corporate and our noncorporate citizens in the tax system.
We are going to hear today from the same people that have ex-
pressed in letters to the Committee their growing alarm, their dis-
appointment that we haven’t addressed this issue, and the serious
challenge that this poses. I believe that the only folks that object
to taking prompt legislative action are the tax hustlers, who are
earning millions of dollars from these schemes, and perhaps a few
of the tax dodgers.
I am not here to glorify H.R. 2255. I believe all of you have copies
of it. I doubt that it is the final word on this matter, and I hope
that from some of the questions and discussions today it can be
perfected further. But what it basically seeks to do is to focus on
the economic substance of a transaction, and is based on testimony
we received back in March and the Senate received in April.
If I can be indulged for just about another minute to quote you
and to do so favorably.
Chairman ARCHER. The gentleman will certainly have adequate
time for his presentation.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you. I will rush through these and then re-
spond to questions.
But I do want to join with some of the comments that you made
in the opening. There is also, other than Section 3, which focuses
on the economic substance rule, Section 4, though it involves some
drafting work, is not original to me. I tried to copy as closely as
I could the recommendations that were made to this Committee
back in the spring and to the Senate Finance Committee, regarding
the disclosure requirements by the American Bar Association’s tax
section, which are somewhat similar to the disclosure requirements
of the New York State Bar Tax Association.
In Section 4, we also increased and tightened the penalties for
tax dodging, an issue that the Joint Tax Committee has also ad-
dressed, to deal with the reasonable cause opinion letter excuse
which I think has been a loophole to escape penalties. And then
also we deal with this question of normal business transactions,
and that is where I said I would quote the chairman.
I believe when you opened our hearing back on March the 10th
you indicated that this area merited review and that we are going
to try to eliminate every abuse that circumvents the legitimate
needs of the Tax Code. But you added, as you have this morning,
we are not going to cast a net that will snare everyone. And I just
want to indicate to you, Mr. Chairman, and to our colleagues, that
my objective is to have that same kind of net. I am interested in
snaring every hustler and cheat.
I am not interested in impairing legitimate business trans-
actions, in invading ordinary tax planning. And I think that one of
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
10
the ways that I do this in the proposal called H.R. 2255 is to have
a section there at pages 6 and 7 concerning normal business trans-
actions. That has been reviewed and received some favorable com-
ment from at least one of the officers from the American Bar Asso-
ciation Tax Section.
And I think that, while the purpose of this legislation is to be
anti corporate tax dodger, it is not intended to be anti corporation
or anti business. Indeed, the idea is to level the playing field. Many
of our smaller businesses don’t get offered some of these high-
priced tax shelter packages.
And, finally, I think the chairman has recognized again this
morning, as you did in March, that we ought not to accord the tax
enforcers unlimited discretion. And that is why I tried to focus in,
instead of defining tax shelter broadly, on the economic substance
doctrine which we already have some experience with, at the same
time that we strive for more certainty in the law, so that a tax-
payer will know what is required of him or her.
It is important that we not merely provide such a strict and nar-
row change in the law that we are according only a road map for
tax cheats. I believe that this Abusive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act,
while certainly not a panacea, would provide some help as it is per-
fected here in the Committee to law enforcement to close some of
the loopholes, eliminate sham transactions and stop the hustlers.
That is my objective, Mr. Chairman; and I thank you for pro-
viding me with this chance.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you for your testimony, Mr. Doggett;
and, without objection, any entire written statement that you have
will be inserted in the record.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of Hon. Lloyd Doggett, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rangel and fellow Committee members, I appreciate the op-
portunity to testify today on corporate tax shelters. In June, I introduced HR 2255,
the Abusive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act, along with my colleague Mr. Stark and
other Members of the House. This represents the lone proposal targeting abusive
shelters filed during this Congress.
As we gather here on what the House Leadership recently indicated would be the
last day of this session, I believe that inattention to the rampant spread of abusive
corporate tax shelters represents one of the major failures of this Congress. The pro-
liferation of abusive corporate tax shelters is costing the federal treasury billions of
dollars.
Professor Michael Graetz recently defined a tax shelter as ‘‘a deal done by very
smart people that, absent tax considerations, would be very stupid.’’ It is true that
many such abusive tax shelters are already illegal. The problem is that every time
we shut down one scheme, tax dodgers come up with more. And that is not by acci-
dent. One Big Five accounting firm reportedly requires its very smart staffers to
come up with at least one of these economically stupid but tax wise corporate tax
dodge ideas per week.
The literal ‘hustling’ of improper tax shelters is so commonplace that one rep-
resentative of a major Texas-based, multi-national corporation recently indicated
that he gets a cold call every day from someone hawking such shelters. Some are
even called ‘‘black box’’ proposals, kept under wraps and only offered to a select few
clients to avoid public notoriety.
As a partner at one national firm boasted, ‘‘A whale can’t get harpooned unless
it surfaces for air.’’ I would call that a whale-sized gulp of arrogance toward honest
taxpayers everywhere who dutifully file returns every April 15 and have to make
up for the taxes that some improperly dodged.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
11
Similarly, Stefan Tucker as Chair of the American Bar Association Tax Section,
a group comprised of 20,000 tax lawyers across the country, told the Senate Finance
Committee on April 27 that:
[T]he concerns being voiced about corporate tax shelters are very real; these con-
cerns are not hollow or misplaced, as some would assert. We deal with corporate
and other major taxpayer clients every day who are bombarded, on a regular and
continuous basis, with ideas or ‘‘products’’ of questionable merit.
Complicated tax dodging schemes impact ordinary taxpayers in at least two ways.
They must both make up for the revenues that tax cheats fail to provide, and they
must pay more for enforcement. In one prominent tax shelter case, the cost of a fed-
eral victory this summer, after prolonged litigation, was over two million dollars.
Amazingly, some actually rely upon such law enforcement successes as justification
for opposing reform. Ad hoc remedies achieved through years of litigation have not
prevented the steady growth in abusive practices. Indeed, the creativity and speed
with which new and more complicated tax shelters are devised is remarkable. Fol-
lowing judicial and administrative rulings, tax shelters are repackaged and remar-
keted with creative titles like sequels to bad movies. Within months of Treasury
shutting down the LILO transactions, products are now being sold as the ‘‘Son of
LILO.’’ Probably ‘‘Cousin of LILO’’ is already being drafted.
I. THE PROBLEM
The dimensions of this problem were first brought to my attention by a con-
stituent in Austin, who urged me, as a new Member of this Committee, to focus
some attention on abusive corporate tax shelters. As I have done so, Mr. Chairman,
beginning with preparation for a hearing before this Committee on March 10, I have
been impressed not by the discord or disagreement but with the near consensus of
all observers regarding the troubling extent of the problem, its damaging impact on
citizen confidence in our tax system, and the need for this Congress to act legisla-
tively now.
Among those who have recognized the serious need to address these abusive and
bogus loopholes are experts from whom we will hear again today:
• With this Congress having ignored their March and April testimony calling for
prompt action, on September 9, the American Bar Association Tax Section again
wrote to the Chairs of the tax writing Committees expressing a ‘‘growing alarm with
the aggressive marketing of tax ‘products’ that have little or no purpose other than
the reduction of Federal income taxes.’’
• With a similar experience and concern, the New York State Bar Association Tax
Section on September 14 wrote, ‘‘We were disappointed to see that after all this
study and testimony and the Administration and Joint Committee reports, the [Re-
publican tax bill] did not contain any provision dealing with this subject. Once
again, we express our concern as to the negative and corrosive effect that corporate
tax shelters have on our system of taxation and again call for Congressional action
on this subject.’’
• The Joint Committee on Taxation reported on July 22, ‘‘The Joint Committee
staff is convinced that present law does not sufficiently deter corporations from en-
tering into arrangements with a significant purpose of avoiding or evading Federal
income tax...The corporate tax shelter phenomenon poses a serious challenge to the
efficacy of the tax system. An obvious concern is the extent of the loss of tax reve-
nues....The proliferation of corporate tax shelters causes taxpayers to question the
fairness of the tax system.’’
• The Treasury Department, in a report released in July said, ‘‘The proliferation
of corporate tax shelters presents an unacceptable and growing level of tax avoid-
ance behavior.’’
About the only people who openly object to prompt legislative action are the tax
hustlers, who are making millions from the schemes they concoct, and perhaps a
few of the tax dodgers themselves.
II. THE LEGISLATION
As filed, HR 2255 represents an attempt to stop at least some of the more egre-
gious corporate tax shelters. The findings and purpose clause contained in Section
2 is very important; it seeks to send a clear and unequivocal message not only to
the shelter hustlers and tax dodgers, but also to the courts and the Administration
that Congress wants this mess cleaned up.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
12
A. Economic Substance Test
Tax shelters hustlers offer their corporate clients complex deals that promise sub-
stantial, near risk-free tax avoidance without any significant possibility of actual
profit or loss. HR 2255 says look at the substance of the entire deal—was it done
to earn a profit or only to achieve a tax rip-off.
HR 2255 codifies the judicially-developed economic substance test, which would
disallow transactions where the profit potential is insubstantial compared to the tax
benefits. This test, which courts have been applying for many years, prohibits trans-
actions lacking any legitimate business purpose ginned up to obtain a loss, credit,
or deduction for the purpose of dodging taxes. As commentator Lee Sheppard wrote
in Tax Notes recently, this represents ‘‘an objective and easily administered test.’’
The test is, after all, just the sort of mathematical analysis that the pro-
moters and their customers sit down and do when they reach an under-
standing about the customer’s tax benefits and cash flow. [It] would deny
tax benefits when the present value of the reasonably anticipated pretax
profits is insignificant relative to the present value of the claimed tax bene-
fits.
As you see, Section 3 at pages 4–5 (§7701(m)(3)) creates a rebuttable presumption
that a transaction has no economic substance when the tax transaction is not re-
flected on the books or records (no financial reporting) or when the transaction allo-
cates the income or gain to a tax-indifferent party such as a tax-exempt entity but
retains the tax benefit for the taxpayer.
As reflected on page 6 of HR 2255 (§7701(m)(5)(B)), complicated, multi-step trans-
actions will be collapsed, and each step must meet the economic substance test. This
provision represents a codification of the common law step-transaction doctrine of
taxation, and the objective is to preclude shelters that have been hidden in separate
but very related transactions that have no economic meaning and that are merely
designed to create tax benefits.
On page 7 (§7701(m)(5)(E)), certain tax incentive programs, such as the Low In-
come Housing Tax Credit, which have been defined in statute by Congress, are ex-
cluded from application of the economic substance test.
B. Disclosure
Section 4 at pages 10–12 (§6662(i)(3)) advises a company that thinks it has a
proper shelter to provide complete, clear and concise disclosure. These disclosure
provisions closely track the thoughtful commentary of tax practitioners from the
American Bar Association Tax Section and are similar to those of the New York
State Bar Association Tax Section. Disclosure includes among other things a de-
tailed description of the facts, as verified by a corporate financial officer, including
fees paid to promoters and existing warranties. What I seek is for a responsible cor-
porate officer to disclose in clear and concise language the legitimate business pur-
poses of a suspect transaction.
C. Penalties
Section 4 at pages 8–9 (§6662(i)) increases and tightens the penalty for tax dodg-
ing. The Substantial Underpayment Penalty for transactions held to be lacking eco-
nomic substance shall be increased from 20% to 40%, with no exceptions for ‘‘reason-
able cause.’’ However, if a sheltering corporation fully and adequately discloses this
shelter, as described in the previous section, then the 20% existing penalty rate
shall apply. By increasing the penalties, corporations will be discouraged against
setting up the shelters in the first place, rather than taking the limited risk that
if caught later, they would owe the same tax and a little interest.
The ‘‘reasonable cause’’ opinion letter excuse has allowed taxpayers to escape all
penalties, and has operated as a huge loophole. Taxpayers need only shop around
the barest of facts on a shelter in order to get an opinion that their sketchy descrip-
tion is ‘‘more likely than not’’ legal. Getting some downtown lawyer to bless what
some tax hustler has cooked up will not save the corporation from penalties any-
more if it has clearly stepped over the line with an abusive tax shelter. As Harold
Handler, chair of the New York State Bar Association Tax Section, testified on April
27 to the Senate Finance Committee in favor of eliminating the opinion excuse:
Consequently, corporate taxpayers would be forced to assume a real risk in
entering into these transactions, and advisers would be induced to supply
balanced and reasoned analysis rather than supplying ‘reasonable cause’ as
under current law.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
13
III. REASONABLE STANDARDS PRESERVING NORMAL BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS
In closing, Mr. Chairman, let me indicate that I share the views expressed by you
in opening this Committee’s March 10 hearing:
The area of corporate tax shelters is one that merits review. . . .We are
going to try to eliminate every abuse that circumvents the legitimate needs
of the tax code. . . .We’re not going to cast a net that’ll snare every one.
I want to cast my net the same way to snare only every hustler and cheat. I be-
lieve that we can curtail abuses without impairing legitimate business transactions,
that we can slow the tax hustlers without precluding ordinary tax planning. One
of the ways HR 2255 seeks to further this objective is by the inclusion of a rule at
pages 6–7 (§7701(m)(5)(C)) entitled ‘‘Normal Business Transactions,’’ which pro-
vides:
In the case of a transaction which is an integral part of a taxpayer’s trade
or business and which is entered into in the normal course of such trade
or business, the determination of the potential income from such trans-
action shall be made by taking into account its relationship to the overall
trade or business of the taxpayer.
Ronald Pearlman, the vice chair for government relations at the American Bar
Association Tax Section has praised this provision of HR 2255 as it ‘‘takes the pres-
sure off’’ legitimate business transactions. This legislation is not directed to normal
business but to the abnormal activity that concerned the Tax Section in the testi-
mony to this Committee on March 10:
The aggressive tax shelters that concern us do not overuse tax benefits con-
sciously granted by Congress (such as accelerated depreciation or credits)
nor are they tax-favored methods of accomplishing a business acquisition or
financing. They are transactions that the parties themselves would gen-
erally concede have little support in sound tax or economic policy, but are,
the parties assert, transactions not clearly prohibited by existing law.
While this legislation is anti-corporate tax dodger, it is certainly not anti-corpora-
tion. Indeed, it should be characterized as pro-business, and particularly pro-small
business. This bill levels the playing field for small businesses, which are not offered
the dodges available to some of their large competitors.
Additionally, I share the view that tax collectors should not be accorded unlimited
discretion. That is one reason why I chose to rely on the well-established economic
substance doctrine. Similarly, the law should be clear enough to inform taxpayers
and their advisors of what is necessary to assure compliance. What must be avoided,
however, is a law that avoids reasonable standards in favor of a narrow list of prohi-
bitions. Rather than stopping abuses, this approach would only provide a roadmap
for tax cheats. As the testimony on behalf of the American Bar Association Tax Sec-
tion before this Committee on March 10 indicated:
[T]otal certainty is impossible where complex transactions are involved.
This is particularly true when the parties seek to avoid judicial principles
developed to deny tax benefits to overly tax-motivated transactions. Tax-
payers and their advisors know that relative certainty can easily be
achieved in legitimate business transactions by steering a safer course and
staying in the middle of the road. The more clearly the transaction stays
within established judicial and administrative principles, the more cer-
tainty is assured. When they venture to the outer edge, certainty cannot be
assured, nor should it be; the parties who consciously risk going over the
edge should clearly understand there are severe consequences for doing so.
Today there are many inequities and injustices associated with the federal tax
code. Some of the worst arise from those who use abusive tax shelters to exploit tax
loopholes. The Abusive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act is not the final answer; it is cer-
tainly not a panacea, but it will help law enforcement to close some loopholes, elimi-
nate sham transactions, and stop these hustlers. As we might say in Texas, ‘‘shut
‘em down, and move ‘em out.’’
f
Chairman ARCHER. Again, the Chair’s desire from the beginning
of taking the chairmanship of this Committee is to be sure that we
eliminate unjustified abuses in the Tax Code. But so often it is dif-
ficult to separate the wheat from the chaff.
And it is not just the complexity of the Tax Code that has con-
cerned me over the years, it is the administrative cost and red tape
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
14
to taxpayers in the private sector, which has been estimated to be
anywhere from $250 billion a year to $600 billion a year, depending
on whose estimates you want to take.
So the concern I think should be what we are putting on our en-
tire economic system from the standpoint of administrative bur-
dens. We need to work our way through that and try to find a way
to separate the wheat from the chaff.
The Joint Committee on Taxation, as you know, has issued a re-
port on penalties and interests. And they stated in their analysis
of your proposal that the way it is currently drafted could affect not
only tax shelters but legitimate business transactions. And you
have appropriately stated that you don’t want to affect legitimate
business transactions, so we have got to find a way to work
through that.
As I said, your currently drafted proposal, you deny every deduc-
tion, loss or credit under the tax law, unless the taxpayer can prove
that it meets the test contained in the bill, the tests of which are
not completely specific, but are, to some degree, vague.
How can a taxpayer show that the present value of reasonably
expected potential income from the transaction and the taxpayer’s
risk of loss from the transaction are substantial in relation to the
tax benefits claimed? Are we back into the mode of putting a bur-
den on the taxpayer to prove innocence which we attempted to re-
form in the IRS reform efforts of the Committee? How is a taxpayer
going to be expected to satisfy that burden?
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, with reference to your comment about the Joint Tax Com-
mittee comment, I think that that particular reference which has
been cited by a lobby group in a letter to the Committee was not
to my proposal. They may feel that way, but what they were writ-
ing about was a proposal that the Treasury discussed back at the
time of our March hearing, which I also had some problems with,
and that is why I tried to narrow in on the economic substance doc-
trine.
But even when you narrow in on the economic substance doc-
trine, as your question suggests, there is a question of how much
certainty is it appropriate to accord in order to separate, which can
be challenging, the wheat from the chaff.
I have used the term ‘‘substantial’’ at one point on page 4,
‘‘meaningful’’ at another point on page 4. The way the Joint Tax
Committee, in its penalty recommendation that you referred to, it
uses similar terms that are not 100 percent specific. It uses the
terms ‘‘significant’’ and ‘‘insignificant’’ in its analysis, I believe that
is over on about page 234 of the Joint Tax Committee recommenda-
tion from the staff back in July.
But let me indicate why I think there has to be some flexibility
in those terms. And, again, they are terms that I didn’t dream up
by myself. They came right out of the testimony that this Com-
mittee got in March from the tax law experts and that the Senate
heard, too.
If you have a taxpayer who has purchased a shelter from one of
these tax hustlers and perhaps has paid several million dollars for
it and they paid several hundred thousand dollars to a tax lawyer
for an opinion, they are not going to come into law enforcement and
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
15
say, I did this deal to cheat on my taxes and tough luck for you.
They are paying for all that high-priced advice to dress up the
transaction in a way to make it appear to be something that it is
not; to make it appear that they took on some real risk, and that
this was a legitimate business transaction.
And so there is a need I think in Section 3, in looking at this,
to suggest that if there was only a very modest, insubstantial
change in the taxpayer’s position, that that will not suffice.
And I believe in saying that, as far as the burden on the tax-
payer, it is not my desire to increase the burden on the taxpayer
over what I believe the existing better law is of the tax decisions.
I think that is what the current doctrine of economic substance al-
ready requires. I believe it is appropriate to demonstrate that the
change in the real economic position of the taxpayer is not dwarfed
by these claimed tax benefits; that it is not a thousand dollars of
potential benefit with a million dollars of tax loss.
Chairman ARCHER. Would it not be appropriate, if the Com-
mittee chose to implement this type of proposal, to provide that the
IRS has to prove that the tests contained in this bill are not met
in order to deny a deduction, rather than to say that every deduc-
tion, loss or credit under the tax law is denied unless the taxpayer
proves? Would it not be more appropriate to put the proof on the
IRS in the same sort of context that our IRS reform proposal did
to address the concerns of taxpayers all over this country that they
are put in a position of having to prove their innocence rather than
to be put in a position of the IRS proving guilt?
Mr. DOGGETT. Of course, I supported your provision to do just
that with reference to our Taxpayer Bill of Rights. And I think that
reference to this kind of tax hustling, I would want to hear from
the Treasury Department on their feeling about how that burden
of proof is placed.
Chairman ARCHER. Okay. Just one last follow-up question. Then
we will recognize other members of the Committee.
Mr. DOGGETT. Sure.
Chairman ARCHER. Does your bill define the term substantial?
What is the definition of substantial? What is the definition of rea-
sonably expected potential income? And what is the definition of
risk of loss?
Mr. DOGGETT. It is more than de minimis, more than nominal,
more than just enough to pay the bill of the tax hustler that got
you into the tax shelter in the first place. But there is no attempt
to define this really in any way other than the true dictionary defi-
nition of these terms.
Does it have meaning? Is it real? Or is it some circular sham like
some of these town hall leasing arrangements that have been dis-
approved? And it does allow for some discretion, just like the rec-
ommendations of the Joint Tax Committee, using terms like signifi-
cant and insignificant, allows for some discretion. And I don’t know
any other way to do it without writing a road map that is so nar-
row that it allows hustlers to immediately write around it.
Chairman ARCHER. There would be a concern on the part of the
chairman as to giving the IRS greater gray areas to pursue, which
has been one of the real complaints in the Tax Code today, where
the discretion is in the eye of the beholder and the IRS’s discretion
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
16
will put significant additional litigation into play. And I just think
we need to work through that.
Mr. Rangel.
Mr. RANGEL. Let me agree with you, Mr. Chairman.
I think that we are finding many different groups that recognize
your leadership in this area, the American Bar Association, the
Treasury Department, the IRS, and the Joint Committee on Tax-
ation. No one wants to be retroactive. No one wants to disrupt le-
gitimate business transactions.
Have you discussed your bill with Treasury and asked their ad-
vice as to how we best proceed without causing additional problems
to the IRS?
Mr. DOGGETT. I have discussed it with Treasury. And I believe,
following the hearing that we had where this Committee had the
first discussion of this particular bill, H.R. 2255, when you incor-
porated it, Mr. Rangel, into the democratic substitute on the ex-
tender’s bill, there was some discussion in the Committee about
why the Committee had not acted. We heard from Ms. Paull about
the interest and penalties report. And so I sought to inquire of
them about the bill, how it would work, and whether there was any
reason for the course not to proceed to adopt a measure of this sort.
I think they will speak for themselves today, but that they basi-
cally embrace the approach taken by this bill. I am sure, just like
members of the Committee who support the bill or have questions
about the bill, it is not without perhaps the need to do some per-
fecting here and there. But the basic approach I have taken I be-
lieve has been embraced by the Treasury Department.
Mr. RANGEL. I think that is a good beginning.
You have pointed out areas of concern about tax shelters. The
IRS has an opportunity to agree or disagree with you. Where they
do agree, I think the IRS has a responsibility to share with this
Committee how we can best carve this cancer out of the Tax Code.
Then, with the help of the Joint Committee on Taxation, I think
we can move forward.
I just don’t know in terms of the timetable of this Committee
when reform will happen because, Mr. Chairman, I would agree
with you that this should occur when we are pulling up the Code
by the roots. And I have been trying to get on the buses to go
around to see how you intended to do this, but so far there doesn’t
seem to be a majority plan to do this. If you are waiting for me
to come up with a plan——
Chairman ARCHER. If the gentleman would yield. I would be
happy to receive your contender in this arena, because I know you
are interested in tearing the income tax out by its roots. You talk
about it all the time. And I would be pleased to know what concept
you support to do that, because I have made my support of the con-
ceptual way to do that, very, very clear, so I hope we can work to-
gether on that.
Mr. RANGEL. I hope so, Mr. Chairman. We can start with hear-
ings, I would think, and then we can see which concept best suits
this Committee.
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Chairman, if I may just respond to part of Mr.
Rangel’s comments that I would view as a query. If you turn even
to today’s Wall Street Journal, on the front page there is an indica-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
17
tion that one of our later witnesses, Mr. Sax, representing the
American Bar Association Tax Section, has said that shelters are
increasing, are attracting big, not only multinational companies but
also midsized businesses and wealthy individuals.
It was only a few weeks ago that another member—another
prominent tax lawyer in the same column, Mr. Michael Schler with
Cravath, Swaine & Moore said there is not going to be much left
of the corporate income tax the way things are going. He said the
capital gains tax for corporations is essentially elective these days,
because of the growing proliferation of tax-saving techniques.
My concern, there may be a day when we will all be gardeners
and rip out the income tax system by its roots and substitute the
more sales tax approach that I have heard you comment on, that
I have heard some other people in Texas comment on. But, until
we do, I just believe that every business entity and taxpayer, be
they big with access to these tax hustlers or be they a midsize com-
pany that doesn’t have that access yet—but, as Mr. Rangel says,
it is a cancer corrupting the system, and they may well in the fu-
ture—that they all play on a level playing field and we enforce the
law equitably.
And I believe that is not too far from the objective that the chair-
man expressed, though we may have a little bit different means of
getting there.
Chairman ARCHER. Does any other member? Mr. Hulshof.
Mr. HULSHOF. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Mr. Doggett. It is interesting to have you on the other
side.
I note from your written statement and your oral testimony you
used the terms hustlers, arrogance, tax cheats and tax-dodging
schemes, and I want to thank the gentleman for toning done his
rhetoric today. And, in seriousness and candor, do you have a fun-
damental belief, Mr. Doggett, that businessmen and women have
a desire to cheat on their taxes?
Mr. DOGGETT. No, I don’t think so. The term tax hustler is also
not original to me. It came from, as you know, from hearing some
of my comments on it, a cover story in Forbes Magazine, known as
The Capitalist Tool, not some ultraliberal publication.
But I do think, and I believe your question really goes to the
heart of it, and Mr. Rangel’s use of the term cancer. If you know
your competitor is taking advantage of one of these outlandish tax
shelter packages and they are getting away with it, then even the
most honest, good-faith operating business and tax department is
encouraged to do the same thing. And I think it drives the whole
standard down, and I think it has the same effect on the tax attor-
neys themselves, and that is one of the reasons they have been
coming to the Committee saying, please move quicker, because we
can see what this is doing to our profession and to our clients.
Mr. HULSHOF. Were you present, and I forget the date, earlier
this year when we had various representatives—and the one that
specifically comes to my mind was a representative of Daimler
Chrysler. And I remember—Mrs. Johnson is not here today, but I
remember the questioning, the line of questioning that she had.
And I don’t want to put words or mischaracterize the testimony of
the representative from Daimler Chrysler, but I heard that rep-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
18
resentative intimate that the reason that the corporate head-
quarters moved from the United States to another country was be-
cause of the complexity of the Tax Code.
Now, do you believe that were your bill, H.R. 2255, were to be
enacted, do you think that that would be more business friendly or
less business friendly?
Mr. DOGGETT. I was here for that testimony, and I think it would
be more business friendly.
And let me say again, your question really cuts to the core of this
problem. Because while the Daimler Chrysler people were talking
about where this business was located, one of the worst aspects of
these shelters is using offshore entities, of running the loss to the
company that is based in America and hiding the gain in some off-
shore entity that can never be taxed.
And that is the kind of transaction, this focusing offshore dodg-
ing taxes in an improper way, that I think the terms like tax hus-
tler are exactly the right terms.
Mr. HULSHOF. Treasury we will hear from a little later, but I
know in an earlier paper, a White Paper issued regarding—just on
corporate tax shelters, that a major source of discrepancy between
book income and tax income is depreciation that is claimed on tax-
payer investments. Do you intend to deny or reduce depreciation
deductions that are provided under tax law and capital equipment
purchased by our Nation’s business, and does your bill have guid-
ance regarding depreciation and expensing?
Mr. DOGGETT. I believe that the bill does have adequate guidance
to deal with this problem in the normal business transaction sec-
tion. It is not my desire to interfere with depreciation, but let me
point to one exception in that regard, an even clearer normal busi-
ness transaction is rent. I certainly don’t intend to interfere with
rent or a purchase of property.
But if the rental, as was the case with the Swiss town hall, the
business is not in the business of renting properties in Switzerland,
and it goes out and it rents a Swiss town hall that it never has
a meeting in, never intends to use for rental and immediately turns
around and rents it back to the Swiss, it can claim its rental pay-
ments as a loss and defers the income. If it is doing a nonsub-
stantive kind of transaction, then, yes, it does have to meet the eco-
nomic substance test.
It is conceivable that some depreciation scheme that was not sub-
stantive, that was truly circular, might require that analysis. But
it is not my intent to interfere with depreciation.
Mr. HULSHOF. As the gentleman knows, my time is about to ex-
pire, and I think this is a fairly simple yes or no answer to the
chairman’s previous point. As your bill is drafted, isn’t it a fact that
every deduction loss or credit is denied unless the taxpayer or in
this case the corporate entity proves or meets the test that you put
in the bill? Isn’t that the essence of your bill, that everyone is de-
nied unless they can prove that it is a legitimate expense?
Mr. DOGGETT. So long as it has economic substance. So long as
it is a real deal. That is all they have to show. If it gets off the
line—to go back to the testimony of the American Bar Association
to this Committee, if it gets way off the line, then they have to
demonstrate economic substance. And my suggestion to the chair-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
19
man earlier was that we inquire further of Treasury concerning the
way that the burden of proof would work on this issue.
Mr. HULSHOF. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ARCHER. The gentleman’s time is expired.
Mr. Foley.
Mr. FOLEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
A lot of us point fingers and call things abuses; and, obviously,
I think we have to probably look in the mirror. As Members of Con-
gress, we write the Tax Code. And we have done so, whether it is
been brilliantly or poorly, we have to take a lot of the burden our-
selves.
I look back at the 1980s and think about some of the unique
things that were offered citizens as investments, oil and gas part-
nerships, real estate investments, where you would have excessive
depreciation, but it was provided for under the Code. And you
would sell this based on the return, not necessarily on a cash-flow
basis, but you would use the depreciation as a way to shelter other
ordinary income, but that was provided for by the Congress. Was
that abusive and should that have been ruled abusive?
Mr. DOGGETT. I think the Congress looked at that and made
some changes in the tax laws to deal with those problems.
My focus here has been on corporate shelters. But as I mentioned
in the Wall Street Journal story from today and other testimony
we are hearing about, these are beginning to spread into other
areas.
I am not sure that this bill as drafted would adequately deal
with some of the problems with individual tax shelters. My focus
has just been on where the problem started, but I think if we don’t
stop it where it started, it will spread and get back to some of the
abuses that this Committee long before you and I got on it decided
were sufficient problems to outlaw.
Mr. FOLEY. How does your by bill, though, treat a legitimate
transaction? I understand there is an enactment date, but what
happens in the event that somebody invested in a shelter such as
a real estate limited partnership? They find at the end, because of
a change in the Tax Code which occurred in 1986, which basically
put the real estate market on the skids, which the change of the
Tax Code then resulted in the FDIC having to bail out numerous
S&Ls and banks because of the throwback of properties that no
longer have value because they unwound the depreciation—now,
obviously, there was a time when they invested based on the eco-
nomic return or, more importantly, based on the tax aspects. We
unraveled that in 1986—or those who were here. Would this bill
then look at that as the new enactment date and claim that abuse
and then file this bill accordingly?
Mr. DOGGETT. This bill is written to be prospective in effect and
not to reach back. But I think some of those transactions under the
judge made law that I try to codify here in the economic substance
test may already be suspect, and those people may have a problem
if they get picked for an audit.
But this particular bill, H.R. 2255, would be prospective in na-
ture and not retroactive.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
20
Mr. FOLEY. That is a concern. And I know a lot of taxpayers who
invested assuming they were going to make their retirement a lit-
tle bit rosier based on projections by speculators, and ultimately
not only did they lose their capital but they—the IRS came in call-
ing for excess depreciation recapture. And so they had—the IRS
was due for their recapture, and so they found themselves not only
out of cash from their original investment, but now they found
themselves further owing the IRS monies, because they accelerated
depreciation.
I think there are problems in the Tax Code, but my bigger con-
cern is are we, in fact, not or shouldn’t we be speaking to ourselves
and not the corporate community? If, in fact, the tax law allows
some of these loopholes or, in fact, creates creative accounting gim-
micks, then it is our job, not necessarily simply by enacting a law,
to say corporations are ripping off the taxpayers. It may be given
the guidance by the U.S. Congress to do so.
Mr. DOGGETT. I think it is our job, and I agree with you fully on
that.
I think that is the irony of the situation we find ourselves in this
year. I believe that sometime in the past, before you and I joined
the Committee, the Committee had been very critical of some as-
pect of the tax-paying community or particularly of the tax advis-
ers, the bar. Here is a situation where the people who represent
20,000 tax lawyers across the country that have to deal with all the
problems you just mentioned are coming, telling the Committee
that they are alarmed because we haven’t dealt with this problem
yet.
And so I think it is strange, that it is a time when those who
are out there having to deal with these problems day in and day
out are saying to us, as members of this Committee, please come
in and change the law to help us in upholding the standards of our
profession and providing competent tax planning advice to clients
that want to comply with the law, rather than corrupting the sys-
tem with the cancer that is beginning to spread and will eventually
affect individuals.
The kind of tax shelters that we have today that I say are being
hustled, that made the cover of Forbes, cost more, I believe, than
most wealthy taxpayers are paying in their total tax bill.
Mr. FOLEY. Would you support a flat tax or a sales tax in order
to end the ambiguity?
Mr. DOGGETT. I am not prepared to do it today. But I will tell
you that I haven’t totally ruled out in my own mind some of the
ideas that have been advanced by the chairman and others to
change the system. Because even from the few months I have been
on the Committee I can see what some of the pressures are and
how these tax bills are written.
So I am not prejudging the final answer, if we are down to look-
ing at alternatives to pulling the system out by its roots. Today, I
would be inclined to stick with trying to perfect the system that
this most powerful nation in the world has relied upon for the last
many decades.
But I won’t rule out considering alternatives in the future. I am
just saying, in the meantime, let us be sure that everybody is play-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
21
ing by the rules and paying their fair share of taxes so we don’t
shift the burden to the few who can’t afford a tax hustler.
Chairman ARCHER. The gentleman’s time has expired.
There is a vote on the floor, and the Chair will recess the Com-
mittee for us to vote.
When we come back, Mr. Jefferson will be recognized to inquire.
[Recess.]
Mr. MCCRERY. [presiding.] The Committee will come to order.
Mr. Doggett, we appreciate your sticking around for a few more
questions; and I believe the chairman had said that Mr. Jefferson
was next to inquire. Mr. Jefferson.
Mr. JEFFERSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Doggett, I want to ask a question about the whole purpose
of this discussion we are having here today. Most reports say that
corporate profits are increasing, yet our corporate taxes are appar-
ently lower than they should be, given the rise in corporate profits.
We use the Tax Code for a lot of different things which are col-
lateral to its real purpose. We use it to incentivize various activi-
ties, to rebuild communities and for housing construction and all
sorts of things and research and development, which I will follow
up with you on in a minute. But, ultimately, isn’t the real purpose
of the Tax Code to collect taxes from the regular economic activity
of the public?
And I want to ask you, in regard to that, whether you think the
lower corporate taxes that are being collected can be attributed in
any way to the proliferation of tax shelters and, if so, to what ex-
tent? And how much are we actually experiencing is losses in the
government treasury as a result of these schemes you talked about
today?
Mr. DOGGETT. Well, as I told the Committee earlier, I don’t hold
myself out as a tax expert. All I can really do is look at what those
who are experts have been saying. I have used in some of my pres-
entations on this the $10 billion per year figure that Professor Jo-
seph Bankman of Stanford Law School has used. I couldn’t find the
precise basis for that. I expect it is an estimate. I have had other
people who are experienced in this field tell me he is off by one
zero, and it is larger than that.
We will hear testimony later today looking at the way corporate
profits have increased and corporate tax receipts have not kept
pace, suggesting that the shortfall might be $13 to $24 billion a
year, though there may be some other factors at play. Those who
know the most about how much money is being avoided improperly
here keep it to themselves. Obviously, they keep it secret.
I do think, and this may or may not be responsive to your ques-
tion, but I am trying to be, that to those who say, well, as I saw
one set of lobby groups did, you are proposing a $10 billion tax in-
crease. It is not my objective to increase taxes. It is to see that all
those who are paying a current level of taxes pay their fair share
on the same even playing field.
And it seemed to me that, responding to the tax increase argu-
ment, not me and not a Democrat but our Republican colleague
Charlie Norwood got it right on this issue about a tax increase
when, in defending this same proposal, H.R. 2255, before the House
Rules Committee here a couple of months ago, he said, and I quote,
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
22
‘‘There is a large difference in what you call a tax increase and
stopping bogus tax shelters. That is really two different things.
They aren’t just asking them to pay more taxes. We are trying to
keep them from cheating the system.’’.
And that is my objective, to stop the cheats, whether the figure
is $1 billion, which is what my bill has been scored on in raising
over a year, or whether it is $10 billion or $100 billion or some-
where in between.
Mr. JEFFERSON. When taxpayers send us here and say take care
of waste, fraud and abuse, and that is an answer to some of the
revenue issues we have here, as far as you see it, they are really
right. And this is an area we can attack some of these problems
by pursuing the course that you are talking about today.
Let me ask you something else, and Mr. McCrery may have a
more detailed question about it as we discuss in what area where
you have some difficulty in framing exactly what is a shelter and
what is not. And is any research and development area, which I
mentioned to you as we were walking out—that is an area where
we are doing a lot in the Tax Code. We are trying to get it to
have—because of the latest technology and thus the strength of our
economy, to give companies opportunities to engage in further re-
search and development, many of which enterprises result in vir-
tually nothing of economic value, and they involve large expendi-
tures that we permit them to write up. How does your bill deal
with that sort of an issue?
Mr. DOGGETT. This does relate to a question that I think Mr.
McCrery has focusing more on the oil industry. The research and
development tax credit, as you have heard me say in this Com-
mittee, is very important in central Texas to our technology compa-
nies, as it is to many other parts of the American economy.
It is never mentioned in this bill. And it is not mentioned be-
cause I don’t believe that it is one of the economic return enhance-
ments where this Congress has specifically said, and you men-
tioned, the low-income housing credit. We said, with low-income
housing tax credits, we think this is so important that, while it
may be viewed as not having economic substance for the companies
and individuals that take advantage of the low-income housing tax
credit, that we are providing a special economic return enhance-
ment, as I defined it on page 7 of the bill, to encourage that.
And I have attempted to identify those. I may not have every one
that there is. That was my objective,and I provided a catch-all to
pick it up, so that Treasury could pick any up that I had omitted
that were properly done through regulations.
But the research and development tax credit is part of normal
business operations like rent, like paying executives, like other in-
vestments. It has economic substance. The business engages in it
to earn more profits. It is not a circular kind of an arrangement
that is done just to dodge taxes.
Mr. MCCRERY. Mr. Doggett, I do have a question about the oil
industry. Before I get to that, though, I want to say that you are
to be commended for looking into this area. I don’t think any of us
want corporate entities or individuals to be abusing provisions of
the Tax Code to shelter income that we don’t intend to be shel-
tered. And I also appreciate your willingness, as stated earlier, to
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
23
work with us in Treasury and Joint Tax and perhaps members of
the private sector to more carefully craft some of the provisions in
your legislation to make sure that we don’t paint with too broad
a brush here.
And one of the broad brush strokes that I see in your bill that
gives me some concern are lack of definitions in the terms. For ex-
ample, one of the tests that a taxpayer has to pass to claim as tax
benefit is the present value of the reasonably expected potential in-
come from the transaction, and then it goes on. And the example
I gave you as we were walking over to the House was the inde-
pendent oil guy that has a wildcatter and goes out and drills a
well, knowing full well that there is a 90 percent chance that he
won’t get any profit from that endeavor. So what is the reasonably
expected profit that he would have to meet under that test?
It just seems to me that it causes some potential problems as we
try to define those terms. Have you thought about that?
Mr. DOGGETT. Yes. And with reference to the wildcatter, of
course, in your part of the country and in mine, without someone
willing to take that substantial risk, we wouldn’t have much of the
energy resources that have fueled our country, and it is important
to preserve the incentives for doing that.
I feel that in most instances the wildcatter is never going to get
to this test, because we have a section of the bill called normal
business transactions. The wildcatter is in the business of search-
ing for oil. This is his normal business transaction, to engage in
high-risk propositions. It might be a little different if some com-
pany that had nothing to do with wildcatting took all the loss and
gave a nontaxable entity all the gain. That is my first answer.
The second one is to focus your attention—and this was a little
of my response about the research and development tax credit
which is so important to me that Mr. Jefferson asked about. You
will see that on page 7 of the bill, at (e), treatment of economic re-
turn enhancements, that the very first one—it may or may not be
obvious, but the very first one deals with what I understand is
called the tight sand credit, where Congress has set up a special
standard. Some might say that the tight sand credit wouldn’t jus-
tify the tests that I have in here.
But I identified that as one that shall be treated as an economic
return, a real return and not a tax benefit. And if there are others
that affect the oil and gas industry like that and we are concerned
Treasury might not recognize them, we should itemize them in the
bill.
Mr. MCCRERY. Well, I appreciate that. I think that is one thing
that we would want to do in any legislation of this type, is try to
identify specific transactions that we know might not meet a rather
vague test and say this is one—this is an example of a transaction
that we think is justified and should be honored under the Tax
Code.
So I think we need to thoroughly examine the Tax Code for other
examples like the tight sands credit to make sure those are not
thrown out with these kinds of reforms.
Mr. DOGGETT. I appreciate your comments. It gets us back to the
discussion that the chairman raised initially in this hearing, is we
want enough certainty for a good-faith wildcatter or small business
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
24
person or Fortune 500 corporation to know what it takes to comply
with the law.
If, however, we define such a narrow list of prohibitions and we
give no discretion to the courts under the economic substance doc-
trine, we are going to find the same tax hustlers that have written
around prior work that this Committee under Chairman Archer
has done to deal with tax shelters and keep coming up with new
ones, like sequels to the bad movies. They will just be given a road
map as to how to write around the law. And I think we have to
try to define that balance between the desire for certainty and
enough flexibility to really prohibit these tax hustlers from doing
what they have been doing. Thank you very much.
Mr. MCCRERY. I am glad to hear you say you are willing to try
and find that balance and not go too far either way.
Any other member of the Committee wishing to inquire?
If not, thank you very much, Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. I thank you very much.
Mr. MCCRERY. Our next panel is Mr. Talisman from the Depart-
ment of Treasury and Ms. Paull from the Joint Committee on Tax-
ation.
Mr. Talisman, you are listed first, so I am going to call on you
to begin. Please know that your written testimony will be entered
into the record in full.
Mr. TALISMAN. Thank you very much.
Mr. MCCRERY. You may proceed.
STATEMENT OF JONATHAN TALISMAN, ACTING ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR TAX POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE
TREASURY
Mr. TALISMAN. Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, it
is a pleasure to speak with you today about the problem of cor-
porate tax shelters and the administration’s proposals to address
this important problem.
Mr. Chairman, in 1986 the Congress cured with almost instant
results the corrosive effect of tax shelter activities that were eating
away the individual income tax base, swamping the IRS and the
Tax Code with controversies and causing a cynical attitude toward
the tax law among many Americans. Today we are addressing a
similar problem affecting the integrity of the tax system, the pro-
liferation of corporate tax shelters, that merits immediate atten-
tion.
When we started working on our White Paper late last year, our
first goal was to raise awareness there was a problem and to ex-
plore the nature of the problem. Now it is clear that there is wide-
spread agreement and concern among tax professionals that the
corporate tax shelter problem is large and growing.
For example, in a prior appearance before this Committee, the
American Bar Association noted its growing alarm at the aggres-
sive views by large corporate taxpayers of tax products that have
little or no purpose other than the reduction of Federal income
taxes and its concern about the blatant, yet secretive, marketing of
such products.
The staff of the Joint Committee, the New York State Bar, TEI
and others have echoed their concern over the proliferation of shel-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
25
ters. Thus, we have moved from whether there is a problem to
what to do to solve the problem. With your help, we hope to curtail
the development, marketing and purchase of corporate tax shelters
frequently sold as products off the rack to produce a substantial re-
duction in a corporation tax’s liabilities.
Why are we concerned? First, corporate tax shelters erode the
corporate tax base. As Chairman Archer noted in his press release
for this hearing, Congress has passed several provisions in the past
few years alone to prevent specific tax shelter abuses which collec-
tively would have cost the tax system over $50 billion.
Second, as the New York State Bar Association recently noted,
the corrosive effect of tax shelters breeds disrespect for the tax sys-
tem, encouraging responsible corporate taxpayers to expect this
type of activity to be the norm and to follow the lead of other tax-
payers who have engaged in tax advantaged transactions. This race
to the bottom, if unabated, will have long-term consequences to vol-
untary compliance, far more important than the short-term rev-
enue loss we are currently experiencing.
Finally, significant resources both in the private sector and the
government are currently being wasted on this uneconomic activ-
ity. To date, most of the attacks on corporate tax shelters have
been targeted at specific transactions and have incurred on an ad
hoc, after-the-fact basis through legislative proposals, administra-
tive guidance and litigation.
For example, recently the Congress passed two provisions to pre-
vent the abuse for tax purposes of corporate-owned life insurance,
which were scored in the tens of billions of dollars, the elimination
of the ability to avoid corporate level tax through the use of liqui-
dating REITs, which passed late last year, and that provision was
estimated by itself to have saved the tax system upwards of $30
billion over 10 years, and legislation passed this year aimed at sec-
tion 357 basis creation abuses.
Mr. Chairman, we very much appreciate these efforts and that
members of this Committee have promptly addressed specific cor-
porate tax shelters that we or others have brought to your atten-
tion. At the same time, the Treasury and the IRS have taken a
number of administrative actions to address corporate tax shelters.
On the regulatory front, we have issued guidance on stepdown
preferred stock, lease trips and foreign tax credit abuses. Most re-
cently, we have brought to light lease-in, lease-out tractions or so-
called LILO schemes.
These transactions, through circular property and cash flows,
purportedly offered participants millions in tax benefits with no
real economic risk. The notion of a U.S. multinational leasing of a
town hall from a Swiss municipality and then immediately leasing
it back to the municipality is surely out on its face.
Finally, we have recently won several important cases, ACM,
ASA, Compaq, Winn-Dixie and others, after many years of litiga-
tion. What you find over time, however, is that addressing the tax
shelter’s transaction by transaction is like attempting to slay the
mythological Hydra. You kill off one over here, and two or three
more appear over there. Already this year we have shut down so-
called chutzpah trusts, which were similar to a structure shut
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
26
down by Congress in 1997, and we are now hearing about ‘‘Son of
LILO’’ and derivations on the section 357 seed product.
Promoters like computer hackers will continue to search for de-
fects in the Code to exploit, and taxpayers with an appetite for tax
shelters will simply move from those transactions that are specifi-
cally prohibited by the new legislation to other transactions, the
treatment of which has not been definitively prescribed.
Legislating on a piecemeal basis further complicates the Code.
Finally, using a transaction legislative approach to corporate tax
shelters may embolden promoters and participants to rush shelter
products to market on the belief that reactive legislation will be ap-
plied perspectively.
What we have done at Treasury is identify the common sources
and characteristics of shelters and incorporated these identified
shelters into our budget proposals so that we may address these
abusive tax-engineered transactions in a more global manner,
hopefully preventing most from occurring. We must change the tax
shelter cost-benefit analysis in a manner that is sufficient to deter
these artificial transactions.
The Treasury Department believes this global solution should in-
clude four parts—first, increasing disclosure of corporate tax shel-
ter activities; two, increasing and modifying the penalty relating to
the substantial understatement of income tax; third, codifying the
economic substance doctrine; and, fourth, providing consequences
to all the parties to the transaction, for example, promoters, advis-
ers and tax-indifferent, accommodating parties.
These proposals are intended to change the dynamics on both the
supply and demand side of this market, making it a less attractive
one for all participants. All the participants to a structured trans-
action should have an incentive to assure that the transaction com-
ports with the established principles.
I would like to emphasize a few key points. First, there is wide-
spread agreement that increased disclosure and changes to the
penalty regime are necessary to uncover transactions and change
the cost-benefit analysis of entering into corporate tax shelters.
However, we do not believe that these procedural remedies alone
are enough. We believe the economic substance doctrine must be
codified, thus requiring taxpayers to perform a careful analysis of
the tax effect of a potential transaction before they enter into it.
Let me be clear, the centerpiece of the substantive law proposal
is not a new standard but rather is intended as a coherent articula-
tion of the economic substance doctrine first found in seminal case
law such as Gregory v. Helvering and most recently utilized in
ACM, Compaq, IES and Winn-Dixie.
The economic substance doctrine requires a comparison of the ex-
pected pretax profits and expected tax benefits. Codification of the
doctrine would create a consistent standard so that taxpayers may
not pick and choose between conflicting decisions to support their
position.
Second, there are substantial similarities between the Treasury
Department’s proposals and other proposals to curb corporate tax
shelters. For example, the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation
agrees that there should be increased disclosure by participants, in-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
27
creased penalties on understatements attributable to undisclosed
transactions and tightening of the reasonable cause exception.
Finally, H.R. 2255, as introduced by Mr. Doggett, contains an ap-
proach similar to the administration’s proposal, including the codi-
fication of the economic substance doctrine. I would like to thank
Mr. Doggett for his leadership in this area and the others who have
contributed to this important debate.
Finally, the proposed legislation would be inadequate without ef-
fective enforcement. The Internal Revenue Service is undergoing a
substantial restructuring. This restructuring will concentrate IRS
resources relating to corporate tax shelters, enabling it to identify,
focus on and coordinate its efforts against corporate tax shelters in
a more efficient manner while instituting and maintaining appro-
priate taxpayer safeguards.
The enactment of corporate tax shelter legislation, combined with
this effort, will deter abusive transactions before they incur and
uncover and stop those transactions to the extent they continue to
occur. We are working closely with Commissioner Rossetti to de-
velop the best overall approach to address corporate tax shelters
and the restructured IRS.
Let me assure you, however, that the Treasury Department does
not intend to affect legitimate business transactions and looks for-
ward to working with the tax writing Committees in refining the
corporate tax shelter proposals. Our White Paper already made
substantial revisions to our original broad budget proposals in re-
sponse to comments we received.
Further, to prevent interference with legitimate business trans-
actions, the IRS and we are considering whether to require exam-
ining agents to refer corporate tax shelter issues to a centralized
office for consideration. Such a referral process might be similar to
that used with respect to the partnership antiabuse rules.
The IRS also is considering whether to establish a procedure
whereby a taxpayer could obtain an expedited ruling from the IRS
as to whether a contemplated transaction constitutes a corporate
tax shelter.
Mr. Chairman, the proliferation of corporate tax shelters pre-
sents an unacceptable and growing level of tax avoidance by wast-
ing economic resources, reducing tax receipts and threatening the
integrity of the tax systems. This morning we have laid out before
you the rationale for a suggested approach for combatting this im-
portant problem and discussed why we believe that existing law
does not provide sufficient tools to combat this behavior. I look for-
ward to working with you and the members of the Committee to
address this problem as we have in the past to curb specific abuses.
Thank you very much.
Mr. MCCRERY. Thank you, Mr. Talisman.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of Jonathan Talisman, Acting Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy,
U.S. Department of the Treasury
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rangel, and distinguished Members of the Committee:
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to discuss the problem of corporate tax
shelters with you today. The Committee on Ways and Means has reacted quickly
with legislation as specific corporate tax shelters come to light. As you mentioned,
Mr. Chairman, the Committee in recent years has acted to close down about $50
billion in tax shelters. Unfortunately, based on all the indications we see, there is
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
28
1See, e.g., Compaq Computer Corp. v. Comm., 113 T.C. No. 17 (1999); IES Industries v. U.S.,
No. C97–206 (N.D. Iowa 1999); Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc. v. Comm., 113 T.C. No. 21 (1999); Saba
Partnership v. Comm., T.C. Memo 1999–359 (1999).
an increasing number of avoidance transactions being undertaken, despite your will-
ingness to enact legislation to stop particular schemes as they are uncovered. Con-
sequently, we are here before you today in support of legislation to deter corporate
tax shelter activity on a more comprehensive, before-the-fact basis.
The Treasury Department, in addition to many others, including the American
Bar Association, the New York State Bar Association and the staff of the Joint Com-
mittee on Taxation, has expressed concerns about the proliferation of corporate tax
shelters. These concerns range from the short-term revenue loss to the tax system,
to the potentially more troubling long-term effects on our voluntary income tax sys-
tem. In its FY 2000 Budget, released in February of this year, the Administration
made several proposals to inhibit the growth of corporate tax shelters.
In July of this year, the Treasury Department issued its White Paper, The Prob-
lem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion, Analysis and Legislative Proposals. This
report discussed more fully the reasoning underlying the Budget proposals relating
to corporate tax shelters, provided a description and analysis of the comments on
the Budget proposals, and provided refinements to those proposals.
Since the issuance of our White Paper, there have been some important develop-
ments regarding corporate tax shelters, including the issuance of the staff of the
Joint Committee on Taxation’s study of present-law penalty and interest provisions,
as well as some important court decisions. With these developments in mind, I
would like to emphasize the following points in my testimony today.
First, corporate tax shelters continue to be a substantial and ongoing problem.
While Congress, the Treasury Department and the Internal Revenue Service take
action to stop particular transactions as they are uncovered, many abusive trans-
actions remain undiscovered and numerous new transactions are created all the
time.
Second, the current ad hoc and piecemeal approach to addressing corporate tax
shelters is inadequate. The current system is costly and inefficient. Admittedly, re-
cent court decisions 1 denying the purported tax benefits of certain shelter trans-
actions are important. However, these decisions are after-the-fact actions against
shelters—they do not prevent the design, marketing, and implementation of new
and different shelters. Furthermore, even though Congress has enacted certain leg-
islative changes curbing certain types of shelters, these statutory prohibitions can
sometimes be avoided by making certain adjustments to a transaction to avoid the
impact of the revised statutory provisions. A global legislative solution is needed to
prevent abusive, tax-engineered transactions before they occur. The Treasury De-
partment believes this global solution should include four parts: increased disclo-
sure, changes to the substantial understatement penalty, codification of the eco-
nomic substance doctrine and sanctions on other parties to the transaction.
Third, while increased disclosure and changes to the penalty regime are necessary
to uncover transactions and change the cost/benefit analysis of entering into cor-
porate tax shelters, these remedies are not enough. Accordingly, the Treasury De-
partment continues to believe that it is necessary to codify the economic substance
doctrine, thus requiring taxpayers to perform a careful analysis of the pre-tax effects
of a potential transaction before they enter into it. The Treasury Department’s pro-
posed substantive provision is intended to be a coherent standard derived from the
economic substance doctrine as enunciated in a body of case law to the exclusion
of less developed, inconsistent decisions. Codification of the doctrine, while not cre-
ating a new doctrine, would create a consistent standard so that taxpayers may not
choose between the conflicting decisions to support their position. Codification would
isolate the doctrine from the facts of the cases so that taxpayers could not simply
distinguish the cases based on the facts.
Fourth, there are substantial similarities between the Treasury Department’s pro-
posals and other proposals to curb corporate tax shelters. For example, the staff of
the Joint Committee on Taxation agrees that there should be increased disclosure
by participants, increased penalties on understatements attributable to undisclosed
transactions and tightening of the reasonable cause exception, and sanctions on
other parties to the transaction. As discussed more fully in the White Paper, the
American Bar Association and the New York State Bar Association proposals con-
tain several elements similar to those in the Administration’s proposal. Finally, H.R.
2255, introduced by Mr. Doggett, also contains an approach similar to the Adminis-
tration’s proposal, including the codification of the economic substance doctrine. We
commend Mr. Doggett for his leadership.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
29
2As Peter Cobb, former Deputy Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation recently
stated: ‘‘You can’t underestimate how many of America’s greatest minds right now are being de-
voted to what economists would all say is totally useless economic activity.’’
3All estimates are based on a balanced panel of 811 corporations with mean asset size in ex-
cess of $1 billion, in 1992 dollars, over the years 1991 through 1996. Corporate tax data are
only available through 1996. We did not use data before 1991 for this comparison because depre-
ciation data from Schedule M–1 are not available before 1991. In addition, the detailed book
data from before 1991 seem inconsistent with the post–1990 data, perhaps because of an ac-
counting method change.
Fifth, the proposed legislation would be inadequate without effective enforcement.
The Internal Revenue Service is undergoing a substantial restructuring. This re-
structuring will concentrate IRS resources relating to corporate tax shelters, ena-
bling it to identify, focus on, and coordinate its efforts against corporate tax shelters
in a more efficient manner, while instituting and maintaining appropriate taxpayer
safeguards. The enactment of corporate tax shelter legislation, combined with the
efforts of the restructured IRS, will deter abusive transactions before they occur and
uncover and stop these transactions to the extent they continue to occur.
The balance of my testimony will elaborate on these points.
REASONS FOR CONCERN
First, corporate tax shelters are designed to, and do, substantially reduce the cor-
porate tax base. Moreover, corporate tax shelters breed disrespect for the tax sys-
tem—both by the parties who participate in the tax shelter market and by others
who perceive unfairness. A view that well-advised corporations avoid their legal tax
liabilities by engaging in tax-engineered transactions may cause a ‘‘race to the bot-
tom.’’ The New York State Bar Association recently noted this ‘‘corrosive effect’’ of
tax shelters: ‘‘The constant promotion of these frequently artificial transactions
breeds significant disrespect for the tax system, encouraging responsible corporate
taxpayers to expect this type of activity to be the norm, and to follow the lead of
other taxpayers who have engaged in tax advantaged transactions.’’ If unabated,
this will have long-term consequences to our voluntary tax system far more impor-
tant than the revenue losses we currently are experiencing in the corporate tax
base.
Finally, significant resources—both in the private sector and the government—are
currently being wasted on this uneconomic activity.2 Private sector resources used
to create, implement and defend complex sheltering transactions are better used in
productive activities. Corporations distort their business decisions to take advantage
of tax shelter opportunities. Similarly, the Congress (particularly the tax-writing
Committees and their staffs), the Treasury Department, and the IRS must expend
significant resources to address and combat these transactions.
CORPORATE TAX SHELTERS AND THE CORPORATE TAX BASE
Some have argued that the growth of corporate income tax receipts demonstrates
that corporate tax shelters cannot be a problem. Of course, the size of the problem
is not indicated by the amount of corporate tax receipts, which vary over time for
a number of reasons, but by the difference between actual tax payments and those
that would be remitted absent corporate tax shelters. That difference is impossible
to measure directly, but the increasing difference between the income taxpayers re-
port on their corporate tax forms (taxable income) and the income they report to
shareholders (book income) appears to be consistent with the increasing use of cor-
porate tax shelters.
One feature of many tax shelters is that they reduce taxable income and taxes
without reducing book income. Corporate taxpayers report their book income on
Schedule M–1 of Form 1120. Such data show that the difference between book in-
come and taxable income for large corporations (average assets greater than $1 bil-
lion) increased between 1991 and 1996.3 Current income reported on corporate tax
returns (total receipts less total deductions) represented a much smaller share of
book income (calculated as book income after tax, plus Federal taxes, less tax-ex-
empt income) in 1996 than in the early 1990s. (See Figure 1.) Thus, even though
corporate income reported on tax returns has increased markedly in the 1990s, book
income has increased even faster. It is unclear how much of the divergence between
tax and book income reflects tax shelter activity, but the data are clearly consistent
with other evidence that the problem is significant.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
30
4Other factors contribute to the gap between book and tax measures of income, including 1)
the differential impact of the business cycle on the two measures, 2) increases in foreign based
income that are reflected in book but not tax income and 3) differences in accounting treatment
for stock options and their increased importance as a component of executive and employee com-
pensation.
Book and tax measures of income can diverge for many reasons that are unrelated
to tax shelters. For example, increases in the rate of new investment can cause book
and taxable income to diverge because tax depreciation is accelerated compared with
book depreciation. But depreciation does not seem to be a significant factor. Figure
2 shows that the difference due to depreciation has declined over the last several
years while the difference between book and tax income continues to climb. Hence,
removing the depreciation discrepancy would actually make the proportional gap be-
tween the two income measures larger in recent years.4
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
31
5Pub. L. No. 104–191, § 501 (1996); Pub. L. No. 105–34, § 1084 (1997)
6Kenneth Kies, Transcript of Federal Bar Association’s Fourth Invitational Biennial Con-
ference on the Tax Legislative Process, reprinted in 97 Tax Notes Today 21–38 (Jan. 31, 1997).
7 Pub. L. No. 105–277, § 3001(a) (1998).
8Rev. Rul. 99–14, 1994–14 I.R.B. 3.
9 Pub. L. No. 106–36, §3001 (1999).
10 Prop. Reg. §1.7701(l)–3.
Need for legislation
To date, most attacks on corporate tax shelters have targeted specific transactions
and have occurred on an ad hoc, after-the-fact basis—through legislative proposals,
administrative guidance, and litigation. In the past few years alone, Congress, the
Treasury Department and the IRS have taken a number of actions to address spe-
cific corporate tax shelters. These include:
1. Two provisions enacted in 1996 and 1997 to prevent the abuse for tax purposes
of corporate-owned life insurance (COLI).5 Collectively, these two provisions were
estimated by the Joint Committee on Taxation to raise over $18 billion over 10
years. As the then Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation stated: ‘‘When
you have a corporation wiring out a billion dollars of premium in the morning and
then borrowing it back by wire in the afternoon and instantly creating with each
year another $35 million of perpetual tax savings, that’s a problem. . . . I think we
were looking at a potential for a substantial erosion of the corporate tax base if
something hadn’t been done.’’ 6
2. Legislation enacted late last year to eliminate the ability of banks and other
financial intermediaries to avoid corporate-level tax through the use of ‘‘liquidating
REITs.’’ 7 The Treasury Department’s Office of Tax Analysis (OTA) estimated that
eliminating this one tax shelter product alone would save the tax system approxi-
mately $34 billion over the next ten years.
3. The recent IRS ruling 8 addressing so-called lease-in, lease-out transactions, or
‘‘LILO’’ schemes. Like COLI, these transactions, through circular property flows and
cash flows, offered participants millions of dollars in tax benefits with no real eco-
nomic substance or risk. Based on the transactions we have been able to identify
to date, OTA estimates that eliminating this tax shelter saved $10.5 billion over ten
years.
4. Legislation signed into law on June 25, 1999, aimed at section 357(c) basis cre-
ation abuses.9 In these transactions, taxpayers exploited the concept of ‘‘subject to’’
a liability and claimed increases in the bases of assets that resulted in bases far
in excess of the assets’ values.
5. Proposed regulations 10 addressing fast-pay preferred stock transactions. These
financing transactions purportedly allowed taxpayers to deduct both principal and
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
32
11 1998–3 I.R.B. 49.
12 73 T.C.M. (CCH) 2189 (1997), aff’d in part, rev’d in part, 157 F.3d 231 (3d Cir. 1998), cert.
denied, 119 S.Ct. 1251 (1999).
13 76 T.C.M. (CCH) 325 (1998).
14 Lawrence H. Summers, ‘‘A Better Tax Service and a Better Tax System,’’ Tax Executives
Institute, March 22, 1999.
15 So far this year, we have shut down so-called ‘‘chutzpah trusts’’ which were similar to a
structure shut down by Congress in 1997 and we are now hearing about ‘‘son of LILO’’ trans-
actions and permutations of the section 357(c) product.
16See Tom Herman, Tax Report, Wall St. J. at A–1 (Feb. 10, 1999).
interest. It was reported that one investment bank created nearly $8 billion of in-
vestments in a few months.
6. Notice 98–5 11 dealing with foreign tax credit abuses.
7. The Government’s victories in several important corporate tax shelter cases—
ACM Partnership v. Commissioner 12 and ASA Investerings Partnership v. Commis-
sioner,13 and those cases mentioned in footnote one of this testimony.
Addressing corporate tax shelters on a transaction-by-transaction, ad hoc basis,
however, has substantial defects. First, because it is not possible to identify and ad-
dress all (or even most) current and future sheltering transactions, this type of
transaction-by-transaction approach is inadequate. There will always be trans-
actions that are unidentified or not addressed by the legislation. As Treasury Sec-
retary Lawrence H. Summers said: ‘‘One is reminded of painting the Brooklyn
Bridge: no sooner is one section painted over, than another appears needing work.
Taxpayers with an appetite for corporate tax shelters will simply move from those
transactions that are specifically prohibited by the new legislation to other trans-
actions the treatment of which is less clear.’’ 14
Second, addressing tax shelters on a piecemeal basis complicates the tax law. In
the past few years alone, Congress has passed numerous provisions to prevent spe-
cific tax shelter abuses. The layering of provision upon provision may lead one to
believe that there is a rule for every situation and thus what is not specifically pro-
scribed is, by negative inference, allowed. In time these specific rules themselves are
used in unintended ways to create corporate tax shelters.15
Third, a legislative strategy that deals with tax shelter transactions on a piece-
meal basis calls into question the viability of current rules and standards, particu-
larly the common law tax doctrines such as sham transaction, business purpose, eco-
nomic substance and substance-over-form. Finally, reliance on a transaction-by-
transaction legislative approach to corporate tax shelters may embolden some pro-
moters and participants to rush shelter products to market on the assumption that
any Governmental reaction would be applied only on a prospective basis.
We believe that a more comprehensive approach to corporate tax shelters is need-
ed. In developing such an approach in the President’s FY 2000 Budget and the
Treasury Department’s White Paper, we examined characteristics of known cor-
porate tax shelters.
Common characteristics
Because corporate tax shelters take many different forms and utilize many dif-
ferent structures, they are difficult to define with a single formulation. A number
of common characteristics, however, can be identified that are useful in crafting an
approach to solving the corporate tax shelter problem.
Lack of economic substance—Professor Michael Graetz recently defined a tax shel-
ter as ‘‘a deal done by very smart people that, absent tax considerations, would be
very stupid.’’ 16 This definition highlights one of the most important characteristics
common to most corporate tax shelters—the lack of any significant economic sub-
stance or risk to the participating parties. Through hedges, circular cash flows,
defeasements and the like, the participant in a shelter is insulated from any signifi-
cant economic risk.
Inconsistent financial accounting and tax treatments—There is a current trend
among public companies to treat corporate in-house tax departments as profit cen-
ters that strive to keep the corporation’s effective tax rate (i.e., the ratio of corporate
tax liability to book income) low and in line with that of competitors. Accordingly,
in many recent corporate tax shelters involving public companies, the financial ac-
counting treatment of the shelter item has been inconsistent with the claimed Fed-
eral income tax treatment.
Tax-indifferent parties—Many recent shelters have relied on the use of ‘‘tax-indif-
ferent’’ parties—such as foreign or tax-exempt entities—who participate in the
transaction in exchange for a fee to absorb taxable income or otherwise deflect tax
liability from the taxable party.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
33
Marketing activity—Promoters often design tax shelters so that they can be rep-
licated multiple times for use by different participants, rather than to address the
tax planning issues of a single taxpayer. This allows the shelter ‘‘product’’ to be
marketed and sold to many different corporate participants, thereby maximizing the
promoter’s return from its shelter idea.
Secrecy—Similar to marketing, maintaining secrecy of a tax shelter transaction
helps to maximize the promoter’s return from its shelter idea—it prevents expro-
priation by others and it protects the efficacy of the idea by preventing or delaying
discovery of the idea by the Treasury Department and the IRS. In the past, many
promoters have required prospective participants to sign a non-disclosure agreement
that provides for large payments for any disclosure of the ‘‘proprietary’’ advice.
Contingent or refundable fees and rescission or insurance arrangements—Cor-
porate tax shelters often involve contingent or refundable fees in order to reduce the
cost and risk of the shelter to the participants. In a contingent fee arrangement,
the promoter’s fee depends on the level of tax savings realized by the corporate par-
ticipant. Some corporate tax shelters also involve insurance or rescission arrange-
ments. Like contingent or refundable fees, insurance or rescission arrangements re-
duce the cost and risk of the shelter to the participants.
High transaction costs—Corporate tax shelters carry unusually high transaction
costs. For example, the transaction costs in the ASA Investerings Partnership case
($24,783,800) were approximately 26.5 percent of the purported tax savings (ap-
proximately $93,500,000).
Administration proposals
In its FY 2000 Budget, the Administration made several proposals designed to in-
hibit the growth of corporate tax shelters. These proposals build upon the common
characteristics of corporate tax shelters described above and focus on the following
areas:
(1) increasing disclosure of corporate tax shelter activities,
(2) increasing and modifying the penalty relating to the substantial understate-
ment of income tax,
(3) codifying the economic substance doctrine, and
(4) providing consequences to all the parties to the transaction (e.g., promoters,
advisors, and tax-indifferent, accommodating parties).
Increasing disclosure
Greater disclosure of corporate tax shelters would aid the IRS in identifying cor-
porate tax shelters and would therefore lead to better enforcement by the IRS. Also,
greater disclosure likely would discourage corporations from entering into question-
able transactions. The probability of discovery by the IRS should enter into a cor-
poration’s cost/benefit analysis of whether to enter into a corporate tax shelter.
In order to be effective, disclosure must be both timely and sufficient. In order
to facilitate examination of a particular taxpayer’s return with respect to a question-
able transaction, the transaction should be prominently disclosed on the return.
Moreover, because corporate tax returns may not be examined for a number of years
after they are filed, an ‘‘early warning’’ system should be required to alert the IRS
to tax shelter ‘‘products’’ that may be promoted to, or entered into by, a number of
taxpayers. Disclosure should be limited to the factual and legal essence of the trans-
action to avoid being overly burdensome to taxpayers.
Disclosure would be required if a transaction has certain of the objective charac-
teristics identified above that are common in many corporate tax shelters. The
Treasury Department believes that two forms of disclosure are necessary. Disclosure
would be made on a short form separately filed with the National Office of the IRS.
Promoters would be required to file the form within 30 days of offering the tax shel-
ter to a corporation. Corporations entering into transactions requiring disclosure
would file the form by the due date of the tax return for the taxable year for which
the transaction is entered into (unless the corporation had actual knowledge that
the promoter had filed with respect to the transaction) and would include the form
in all tax returns to which the transaction applies. The form would require the tax-
payer to provide a description of the characteristics that apply to the transaction
and information similar to the information in the ABA disclosure proposal. The form
should be signed by a corporate officer who has, or should have, knowledge of the
factual underpinnings of the transaction for which disclosure is required. Such offi-
cer should be made personally liable for misstatements on the form, with appro-
priate penalties for fraud or gross negligence and the officer would be accorded ap-
propriate due process rights.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
34
17These criticisms were addressed by the Treasury Department by modifying the definition
of these terms.
Substantial understatement penalty
In order to serve as an adequate deterrent, the risk of penalty for corporations
that participate in corporate tax shelters must be real. The penalty also must be
sufficient to affect the cost/benefit analysis that a corporation considers when enter-
ing into a tax shelter transaction.
The Treasury Department believes that the substantial understatement penalty
imposed on understatements of tax attributable to corporate tax shelters should be
greater than the penalty generally imposed on other understatements. This view is
shared by the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation, the ABA, the NYSBA and
others. Thus, to discourage the use of shelters, the Treasury Department would dou-
ble the current-law substantial understatement penalty rate to 40 percent for cor-
porate tax shelters. To encourage disclosure, the penalty rate would be reduced to
20 percent if the taxpayer files the appropriate disclosures.
In the original Budget proposal, the Administration provided that the rate could
not be further reduced below 20 percent or eliminated by a showing of reasonable
cause (i.e., the penalty would be subject to a strict liability standard). Although one
may rhetorically question whether there ever is any reasonable cause for entering
into a corporate tax shelter transaction, many commentators have criticized the pro-
posed elimination of the reasonable cause exception for corporate tax shelters. These
commentators cited the potentially vague definitions of corporate tax shelter and tax
avoidance transaction,17 the allowance of a reasonable cause exception for other
penalties, and basic fairness for opposing a ‘‘strict liability’’ penalty. The Treasury
Department still believes that the penalty structure set forth in the Administra-
tion’s FY 2000 Budget is appropriate. However, in light of the comments received,
the Treasury Department believes that consideration should be given to reducing or
eliminating the substantial understatement penalty where the taxpayer properly
discloses the transaction and the taxpayer has a reasonable belief that it has a
strong chance of sustaining its tax position. In addition, because many commenta-
tors believe that taxpayers are either ignoring or circumventing the requirements
of Reg. §1.6664–4 as to what constitutes reasonable cause, these requirements
would be codified to heighten visibility and strengthened to the extent necessary.
Under the Treasury Department’s modified approach, a strengthened reasonable
cause standard could be used to reduce or eliminate the substantial understatement
penalty if the taxpayer also properly disclosed the transaction in question, even if
the transaction ultimately is deemed to be a corporate tax shelter. This limited ex-
ception would encourage disclosure and would alleviate some taxpayer concerns
with respect to the definition of corporate tax shelter.
Finally, as discussed below, fears that the IRS may abuse the potential avail-
ability of increased substantial understatement penalties would be addressed by es-
tablishing procedures that would enhance issue escalation and facilitate consistent
and centralized resolution of such matters.
Codify the economic substance doctrine
As evidenced by the comments from the ABA, AICPA, NYSBA, and others, cor-
porate tax shelters are proliferating under the existing legal regime. This prolifera-
tion results, in part, because discontinuities in objective statutory or regulatory
rules can lead to inappropriate results that have been exploited through corporate
tax shelters. Current statutory anti-abuse provisions are limited to particular situa-
tions and are thus inapplicable to most current corporate tax shelters. Further, ap-
plication of existing judicial doctrines has been inconsistent over time, which en-
courages the most aggressive taxpayers to pick and choose among the most favor-
able court opinions.
The current piecemeal approach to addressing corporate tax shelters has proven
untenable, as (1) policymakers do not have the knowledge, expertise and time to
continually address these transactions; (2) adding more mechanical rules to the
Code adds to complexity, unintended results, and potential fodder for new shelters;
(3) the approach may reward taxpayers and promoters who rush to complete trans-
actions before the anticipated prospective effective date of any reactive legislation;
and (4) the approach results in further misuse and neglect of common law tax doc-
trines. Thus, the Treasury Department believes that a codification of the economic
substance doctrine is necessary in order to curb the growth of corporate tax shelters.
While increased disclosure and changes to the penalty regime are necessary to esca-
late issues and change the cost/benefit analysis of entering into corporate tax shel-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
35
18 293 U.S. 465 (1935).
19ACM Partnership v. Comm., 73 T.C.M. (CCH) 2189, aff’d in part, rev’d in part
ters, these remedies are not enough if taxpayers continue to believe that they will
prevail on the underlying substantive issue.
The centerpiece of the substantive law proposal is the codification of the economic
substance doctrine first found in seminal case law such as Gregory v. Helvering 18
and most recently utilized in ACM Partnership 19 and the cases in footnote one. The
economic substance doctrine requires a comparison of the expected pre-tax profits
and expected tax benefits. This test is incorporated in the first part of the Adminis-
tration’s proposed definition of ‘‘tax avoidance transaction.’’ Under that test, a tax
avoidance transaction would be defined as any transaction in which the reasonably
expected pre-tax profit (determined on a present value basis, after taking into ac-
count foreign taxes as expenses and transaction costs) of the transaction is insignifi-
cant relative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits (i.e., tax benefits in excess
of the tax liability arising from the transaction, determined on a present value
basis) of such transaction. In addition, the economic substance doctrine would apply
to financing transactions (that do not lend themselves to a pre-tax profit compari-
son) by comparing the tax benefits claimed by the issuing corporation to the eco-
nomic profits derived by the person providing the financing.
A tax benefit would be defined to include a reduction, exclusion, avoidance or de-
ferral of tax, or an increase in a refund. However, the definition of tax benefit sub-
ject to disallowance would not include those benefits that are clearly contemplated
by the applicable Code provision (taking into account the Congressional purpose for
such provision and the interaction of the provision with other provisions of the
Code). Thus, tax benefits that would normally meet the definition, such as the low-
income housing credit and deductions generated by standard leveraged leases,
would not be subject to disallowance.
The above definition of a tax-avoidance transaction is a modification of the Ad-
ministration’s original FY 2000 Budget proposal. The modifications address com-
mentators’ concerns about the potential vagueness of the original proposal. Concerns
that the IRS might abuse the authority indicated in the original Budget proposal
are addressed by a more concrete definition of tax avoidance transaction. In addi-
tion, the tax attribute disallowance rule would apply by operation of law, rather
than being subject to the discretion of the Secretary.
A similar approach to that discussed above can be found in H.R. 2255, the ‘‘Abu-
sive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act of 1999,’’ introduced by Messrs. Doggett, Stark, Hin-
chey and Tierney on June 17, 1999.
The Treasury Department continues to believe that it is necessary to codify the
economic substance doctrine, thus requiring taxpayers to perform a careful analysis
of the pre-tax effects of a potential transaction before they enter into it. The Treas-
ury Department’s proposed substantive provision is intended to be a coherent stand-
ard derived from the economic substance doctrine as enunciated in a body of case
law to the exclusion of less developed, inconsistent decisions. Codification of the doc-
trine, while not creating a new doctrine, would create a consistent standard so that
taxpayers may not choose between the conflicting decisions to support their position.
Codification would isolate the doctrine from the facts of the cases so that taxpayers
could not simply distinguish the cases based on the facts.
Consequences to other parties
Proposals to deter the use of corporate tax shelters should provide sanctions or
remedies on other parties that participate in, and benefit from, a corporate tax shel-
ter. These remedies or sanctions would reduce or eliminate the economic incentives
for parties that facilitate sheltering transactions, thus discouraging those trans-
actions. As the ABA stated in its recent testimony: ‘‘All essential parties to a tax-
driven transaction should have an incentive to make certain that the transaction
is within the law.’’ With respect to corporate tax shelters, the ‘‘other parties’’ gen-
erally are promoters, advisors, and tax-indifferent parties that lend their tax-exempt
status to the shelter transaction to absorb or deflect otherwise taxable income.
When Congress was concerned with the proliferation of individual tax shelters in
the early 1980s, it enacted several penalty and disclosure provisions that applied
to advisors and promoters. These provisions were tailored to the types of ‘‘cookie-
cutter’’ tax shelter products then being developed. Similar provisions could be en-
acted that are tailored to corporate tax shelters.
Alternatively, with respect to promoters and advisors of corporate tax shelters, the
Treasury Department proposed to affect directly their economic incentives by lev-
ying an excise tax of 25 percent upon the fees derived by such persons from the cor-
porate tax shelter transaction. Only persons who perform services in furtherance of
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
36
20BNA Daily Tax Report (Oct. 28, 1999), G–2.
the corporate tax shelter would be subject to the proposal, and appropriate due proc-
ess procedures for such parties with respect to an assessment would be provided.
A tax-indifferent party often has a special tax status conferred upon it by oper-
ation of statute or treaty. To the extent such person is using this status in an inap-
propriate or unforeseen manner, the system should not condone such use. Imposing
a tax on the income allocated to tax-indifferent parties could deter the inappropriate
rental of their special tax status, limiting their participation in corporate tax shel-
ters, and thus reducing other taxpayers’ use of shelters that utilize this technique.
The Treasury Department proposes to require tax-indifferent parties to include in
income (either as unrelated business taxable income or effectively connected income)
income earned in a corporate tax shelter transaction. To the extent such parties are
outside the U.S. tax jurisdiction, such liability would be joint and severable with the
U.S. corporate participant. The proposal would apply only to tax-indifferent parties
that are trading on their special tax status and such parties would have appropriate
due process rights.
JCT Report
The staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT), in its study and report on
penalty and interest provisions of the Code, also analyzes corporate tax shelters.
The JCT staff concluded that there ‘‘is evidence that the use of corporate tax shel-
ters has grown significantly in recent years’’ and ‘‘that present law does not suffi-
ciently deter corporations from entering into arrangements with a significant pur-
pose of avoiding or evading Federal income tax.’’ In this regard, the staff made cer-
tain legislative recommendations.
The proposals made by the JCT staff are quite similar to those made by the Ad-
ministration. The JCT staff proposal would require increased disclosure, increase
the substantial understatement penalty on undisclosed transactions and tighten the
reasonable cause standard, and provide sanctions on other parties to shelter trans-
actions. The major difference between the two sets of recommendations is that the
JCT would not codify the economic substance doctrine. However, the JCT proposal
does incorporate a version of the economic substance doctrine similar to that of the
Administration’s proposals in identifying corporate tax shelters.
Compaq and other recent decisions
Since we last testified before this Committee on the problem of corporate tax shel-
ters, the IRS has won some significant tax shelter cases, including Compaq, IES In-
dustries, Winn-Dixie, and Saba Partnership. The courts in these cases applied an
economic substance analysis in denying tax benefits that purportedly met the black
letter of the applicable Code provisions.
These cases are helpful as part of an overall approach to address corporate tax
shelters. First, the cases stand for the proposition that both the economic substance
doctrine and the role of penalties are important components in the fight against cor-
porate tax shelters. Some may argue that these cases demonstrate that the IRS cur-
rently has all the tools it needs to combat corporate tax shelters and that further
legislation is unnecessary. Such an assertion ignores the realities of the litigation
process and is premised on a misunderstanding of the intent of the Administration’s
legislative proposals.
Reliance on judicial decisions, which taxpayers may attempt to distinguish, is not
the most efficient means of addressing corporate tax shelters. Litigation is expensive
and time-consuming, both for the government and taxpayers, and frequently does
not provide a coherent set of rules to be applied to subsequent transactions. Tax
Court Judge Laro, speaking on his own behalf before the Tax Executives Institute
last month,20 acknowledged that the courts have provided little guidance on the
amount of economic substance or business purpose sufficient for a transaction to be
respected. He stated that such concepts ‘‘may require further development in the
case law,’’ but highlighted the difficulty with such an approach when he said that
judges ‘‘decide cases one at a time...and don’t make tax policy.’’
The Treasury Department strongly believes that the economic substance doctrine
upon which these recent cases have been decided should be codified. The doctrine
has been a part of the fabric of our tax system since the seminal case of Gregory
v. Helvering, but has, until recently, been eroded by some admittedly confusing and
conflicting case law that has led to a lack of respect for the doctrine on the part
of some taxpayers and tax practitioners. The economic substance doctrine is the
most objective, most understandable, and most easily applied of all the judicially
created doctrines. We believe that it is appropriate for the Congress to elevate this
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
37
standard by codifying it, rather than waiting and hoping that the case law evolves
in a more coherent and understandable manner.
The Administration’s corporate tax shelter proposals, including enactment of the
economic substance doctrine, attempt to change the outcome of the cost-benefit anal-
ysis undertaken by taxpayers in deciding whether or not to engage in a questionable
transaction. Taxpayers should be encouraged to apply these principles before the
fact, rather than playing the audit lottery. The Administration’s proposals provide
a level playing field between overly aggressive taxpayers and compliant taxpayers
and between overly aggressive taxpayers and their advisors and the government by
ensuring that all parties are playing by the same objective rules, encouraging timely
disclosure of potentially questionable transactions, and providing appropriate sanc-
tions to parties that ‘‘cross the line.’’
IRS administrative actions
The IRS currently is undergoing a substantial restructuring. The IRS will be reor-
ganized into divisions based on types of taxpayers. Because the Treasury proposals
generally apply to large corporate transactions, the IRS personnel focusing on cor-
porate shelters probably will be located in the IRS’s new Large and Mid-Size Busi-
ness Division, which will be fully operational in 2000.
The restructuring of the IRS will enhance its ability to deal with corporate tax
shelters. Centralization of IRS resources focusing on corporate tax shelters will fa-
cilitate training and coordination among IRS agents, IRS litigators, their super-
visors and Chief Counsel. The IRS also is considering methods to centralize and co-
ordinate the formulation of strategy regarding corporate shelters generally and par-
ticular shelter transactions.
Further, to prevent interference with legitimate business transactions, the IRS is
considering whether to require examining agents to refer corporate tax shelter
issues to a centralized office for consideration. Such a referral process might be
similar to that used with respect to the partnership anti-abuse regulations. The IRS
is also considering whether to establish of a procedure whereby a taxpayer could ob-
tain an expedited ruling from the IRS as to whether a contemplated transaction con-
stitutes a corporate tax shelter.
The Treasury Department will work closely with the IRS to create appropriate
systems and procedures to centralize review and analysis, to ensure fair, consistent,
and expeditious consideration of corporate tax shelter issues.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, the proliferation of corporate tax shelters presents an unacceptable
and growing level of tax avoidance behavior by wasting economic resources, reduc-
ing tax receipts, and threatening the integrity of the tax system. This morning we
have laid out the rationale for our suggested approach for combating this problem,
and discussed why we believe that existing law does not provide sufficient tools to
combat this behavior. We look forward to working with you and the members of the
Committee to address this important problem, as we have in the past to curb spe-
cific abuses.
[The Attached July 1999 ‘‘White Paper’’ by the U.S. Department of the Treasury,
Entitled, ‘‘The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion, Analysis and Legisla-
tive Proposals,’’ is Being Retained in the Committee Files, and is also available at
WWW.USTREAS.GOV/TAXPOLICY/LIBRARY/CTSWHITE.PDF.]
f
Mr. MCCRERY. Ms. Paull.
STATEMENT OF LINDY PAULL, CHIEF OF STAFF, JOINT
COMMITTEE ON TAXATION
Ms. PAULL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the Com-
mittee. I am pleased to present the testimony of the staff of the
Joint Committee on Taxation today.
My testimony focuses on the staff’s recommendations that were
made in the penalties and interest study that was released in July.
That study was mandated by the IRS Reform Act and included, in
addition to corporate tax shelter recommendations, recommenda-
tions on other penalties and interest provisions of the Tax Code
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
38
which I hope the Committee will have the opportunity to look at
in the near future.
Attached to my testimony today are two documents. One, the
first attachment, is a compilation of some data with respect to in-
come tax receipts—broken down by individual, corporation and
total receipts as well as GDP for the period, so that the Committee
can have our data on these matters. And, in addition, we have a
second table in that first attachment that provides some informa-
tion on corporate income during the last decade basically.
The second attachment to our testimony is a very lengthy docu-
ment. I apologize to the Committee for not providing it earlier. It
is difficult to come to closure on some of these documents. In this
document, we attempted to compile all of the concerns raised with
respect to both the Treasury proposals, Mr. Doggett’s proposals,
and, in the interest of fair play, the Joint Tax Committee staff’s
recommendations.
So we hope this will be a useful document as the Committee
gives further consideration to this issue, because there are lots of
issues as you go about trying to deal with this very complicated
matter.
In conducting our study, we did a very comprehensive review of
the substantive laws under the Tax Code, the various common law
doctrines that the courts used to evaluate potentially abusive
transactions and the standards of practice that apply to the tax ad-
visers that participate with the investors in these transactions.
We spent a considerable amount of time meeting with people,
analyzing the various proposals, and trying to sort out the best we
can where we are on this particular issue. We believe, as is stated
in our report and in our testimony, that there is a problem with
corporate tax shelters. We believe it is a growing problem, and we
have to say that we don’t have hard data on that.
I don’t think anybody has any hard data on that. Much of the
evidence dealing with this kind of a subject is anecdotal that we
get all the time from tax practitioners, corporations across the
country talking to us about transactions, so it is that source of an-
ecdotal testimony discussions that our staff gets. And all the kind
of groups that have been testifying before Congress this year have
indicated there is a growing problem with corporate tax shelters—
I think it would be hard to ignore that there is a growing problem
here.
Although we have provided you with our income tax receipt data,
we would caution you about the use of it and pointing to it, saying
that this is evidence of corporate tax shelter activity. I don’t think
anybody, the Treasury Department or our staff, would be able to
tell you that that data tells you very much. We don’t have a good,
comprehensive analysis of what the data means. And I think that
it is only fair to say that there are a lot of factors at play here.
There is a growing use of subchapter S corporations and other
types of pass-through entities that could well be significant in look-
ing at corporate receipts.
On the other hand, if you do look at the corporate income tax re-
ceipts that are shown in the table, table 1 of attachment 1, you will
see that corporate receipts are basically flat over the last couple of
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
39
years. In fact, the most recent reports indicates they have gone
down slightly, when we have a growing economy.
So there is an issue there. We don’t have any hard data that
would tell you what is causing the decline in corporate income tax
receipts. I would caution you on the use of macroeconomic statistics
in going about analyzing this problem.
As Mr. Talisman said, there have been some recent court cases
that dealt with some very aggressive transactions, and we have
been trying to get as much information as we can about other simi-
lar cases that might be in the pipeline, and we have provided some
data in my testimony about that.
We believe there are at least eight other cases outstanding in-
volving the same kind of issues that are involved in the ACM case
and the total tax involved, which might span a number of years,
is roughly in the range of a billion dollars for that one issue.
Another recent case dealt with the Compaq Computer Corpora-
tion. We believe that there is at least 15 other cases outstanding
involving the same issue there and possibly quite a few more.
Those 15 cases might involve about approximately $60 million in
taxes.
And Winn-Dixie, another very recent case that dealt with cor-
porate-owned life insurance, we believe there is as many as 100
similar cases outstanding dealing with similar issues which may
involve about $6 billion in taxes.
So if you add up those three transactions that were the subject
of recent court cases where the courts held that the transactions
that were entered into basically do not have any economic sub-
stance or they were possibly a sham in one instance, you will see
over a short period of time about $7 billion in play, according to
our statistics, and we believe they are conservative statistics. So
while we don’t have hard evidence about what is happening to cor-
porate income tax receipts, we do have some evidence about ques-
tionable transactions that are in the pipeline and in controversy at
the current time.
Those cases are early 1990 cases. What we have been hearing
from practitioners and from corporate insiders is that the activity
with respect to these type of aggressive transactions has been oc-
curring more and more in recent years. So there is a disconnect
here between that kind of data, which involves transactions that
date back to the early 1990s, and what is happening now.
All I can say is I think the Treasury Department and our staff
will be monitoring and trying to provide the best data we can pro-
vide to the Committee as we get it during this process.
With respect to the reason why a corporate tax shelter problem
exists, we identified the penalty regime as a real problem under
current law. We don’t think the chances of getting hit with a pen-
alty are very great.
Again, we have taken a look at the most recent data on how
much penalties in the nature of underpayment penalties or neg-
ligence penalties are paid by corporations. They are extremely
small compared to the dollars that are outstanding in controversy
and the dollars that are paid after a tax return is filed by corpora-
tions. So we believe there is a significant problem here with respect
to the penalty regime. Because when a corporation or anybody en-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
40
ters into a business transaction, the analysis they do is a cost-ben-
efit analysis: What is the costs of doing the transaction and what
benefits am I going to derive from the transaction?
And, right now, we believe that the cost-benefit analysis is tilted
in favor of going forward with more aggressive transactions be-
cause the downside is very low. Very rarely will there be a penalty.
You only have to pay the tax if you get caught on audit, so you play
the audit lottery with these transactions. And it may take a long
time to come to a resolution. If you have to go to court, it could
take 4 or 5 years to resolve the issue. During that period, you have
the use of the money.
So the real downside is that you might pay some interest on this
money that you end up paying if you get caught. So we think, after
quite a bit of analysis, that the proper way to approach the cor-
porate tax shelter problem is to look at the penalty regime and see
if you can address the issue of increasing the stakes and the costs
of these types of transactions.
Mr. HOUGHTON. [presiding.] Ms. Paull, how much longer do you
think you will be?
Ms. PAULL. I think I need about 4 more minutes.
Mr. HOUGHTON. All right.
Ms. PAULL. We have really struggled with the notion of trying to
codify the court cases on this subject. And that, of course, is one
of the approaches the Treasury Department has taken and Mr.
Doggett in his legislation tries to take.
You know, when you try to codify those cases, you end up having
to go down the road, I think, of exempting out various transactions
or investments. In the case of the Treasury Department, they put
in this notion of clearly contemplated by the Tax Code. Your trans-
action might be in trouble unless it is clearly contemplated by the
Tax Code.
Mr. Doggett’s legislation says your transaction might be in trou-
ble unless you are on the good list, so to speak. He provides a list
of some good items in the Tax Code and then allows the Treasury
Department to add to the list. This is the most difficult thing you
will need to focus on here is what is a corporate tax shelter. It is
not susceptible, in our view, of an easy definition.
We do attempt to identify the indicators of the modern day cor-
porate tax shelter for purposes of beefing up the penalty regime.
But for purposes of determining your underlying tax liability,
this is a very, very difficult thing to do. And I would caution the
Committee on that in that regard. And as I said before, we have
more fully presented those kinds of issues in this document that is
before you today, appendix number 2.
If I might just briefly summarize the specific recommendations
that the Joint Committee staff did in its report this summer. We
believe the current penalty regime should be strengthened. In
order to do that, you have to come to some grips with what is the
kind of transaction that you want to hit with a strengthened pen-
alty. So we have set forth some indicators of a corporate tax shel-
ter, which I will not go into now, but I would be happy to discuss
with anybody.
We also would modify the penalty so there would be no require-
ment that there is a substantial understatement. For a large cor-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
41
1This testimony may be cited as follows: Joint Committee on Taxation, Testimony of the Staff
of the Joint Committee on Taxation Before the House Committee on Ways and Means (JCX–82–
99), November 10, 1999.
2 Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest Provisions as Re-
quired by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998
(Including Provisions Relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS–3–99), July 22, 1999 (‘‘;Joint
Committee staff study’’).
3 Joint Committee on Taxation, NIPA and Federal Income Tax Receipts Data (JCX–83–99), No-
vember 10, 1999.
4 Joint Committee on Taxation, Description and Analysis of Present-Law Tax Rules and Recent
Proposals Relating to Corporate Tax Shelters (JCX–84–99), November 10, 1999.
5Code section 6662.
poration, the current penalty regime gives, in essence a fudge fac-
tor of 10 percent of the taxes that should be known on a return.
We would also elevate the standards for getting out of the pen-
alty, and we would ask that the penalty be increased from 20 to
40 percent.
In addition, we have a series of proposals that are directed at ad-
visors or other participants in the transactions. And we also have
a series of disclosure and registration requirements not unlike in
the other bills.
So with that, I would welcome the opportunity to answer any
questions you may have and look forward to working with you as
you try to grapple with this very difficult issue.
Mr. HOUGHTON. We do, too, and thanks very much, Ms. Paull.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of Lindy Paull, Chief of Staff, Joint Committee on Taxation
My name is Lindy Paull. As Chief of Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation,
it is my pleasure to present the written testimony of the staff of the Joint Com-
mittee on Taxation (the ‘‘Joint Committee staff’’) at this hearing before the House
Committee on Ways and Means concerning corporate tax shelters.1
My testimony today focuses on recommendations made by the Joint Committee
staff with respect to corporate tax shelters, which are contained in Part VIII of the
study prepared by the Joint Committee staff regarding the present-law penalty and
interest provisions.2 Two attachments supplement my testimony. The first attach-
ment provides data on Federal income tax receipts and corporate income.3 The sec-
ond receipt attachment is our staff’s further analysis of the issues presented by cor-
porate tax shelter proposals and recommendations.4
I. BACKGROUND
Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of
1998 directed the Joint Committee on Taxation and the Secretary of the Treasury
to conduct separate studies of the present-law interest and penalty provisions of the
Internal Revenue Code (‘‘;Code’’) and to make any legislative or administrative rec-
ommendations to the House Committee on Ways and Means and the Senate Com-
mittee on Finance that are deemed appropriate to simplify penalty and interest ad-
ministration or reduce taxpayer burden. The Joint Committee staff study makes a
number of recommendations with respect to non-corporate tax shelter penalties and
interest that will be the subject of a separate hearing by the Subcommittee of Over-
sight of the House Committee on Ways and Means.
The Joint Committee staff recommendations regarding corporate tax shelters were
the product of an extensive review and analysis of the present-law system of pen-
alties and interest in the Code. The Joint Committee staff study focused on sanc-
tions in the Code that relate to the collection of the proper amount of tax liability,
such as penalties relating to payment of the proper amount of tax, reporting of in-
come, and failure to provide information returns or reports.
The penalty provisions reviewed by the Joint Committee staff relating to tax shel-
ters include the following:
(1) The accuracy-related penalty imposes a 20 percent penalty on any sub-
stantial understatement of income tax that, among other things, is attrib-
utable to corporate tax shelters.5
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
42
6Code sections 6694 and 6695.
7Code section 6701.
8Code section 6700.
9Code sections 6111 and 6112.
10Code sections 6707 and 6708.
11Code sections 269, 446, 482 and 7701(l).
12 The common-law doctrines include the sham transaction doctrine, the economic substance
doctrine, the business purpose doctrine, the substance over form doctrine, and the step trans-
action doctrine.
13See regulations found in Title 31, Part 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations. In addition,
the Joint Committee staff reviewed various standards of practice and rules of professional con-
duct of the American Bar Association, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants,
and general state licensing authorities.
(2) Income tax return preparers may be liable for a penalty with respect
to an understatement of a taxpayer’s liabilities.6
(3) Penalties may be imposed on those who aid and abet a taxpayer with
respect to a return that results in an understatement of tax liability.7
(4) Penalties may be imposed on those who promote abusive tax shelters.8
(5) Registration requirements apply with respect to tax shelters 9 and pen-
alties are imposed for failing to comply with the registration require-
ments.10
The Joint Committee staff concluded after reviewing the above provisions that a
comprehensive study of the present-law penalty provisions of the Code relating to
tax shelters was appropriate.
II. METHODOLOGY
The Joint Committee staff conducted a comprehensive review of the penalty and
interest rules applicable to corporate tax shelters and evaluated their effectiveness
in dealing with modern-day corporate tax shelter transactions. As part of the review
process, the Joint Committee staff analyzed:
(1) The substantive laws in the Code that are designed to, among other
things, deter tax-shelter transactions 11 and their interaction with the pen-
alty and interest rules,
(2) The various common-law doctrines used by the courts to evaluate and
potentially disallow tax benefits claimed in tax shelter transactions 12 and
the imposition of penalties with respect to these transactions, and
(3) The standards of practice that affect certain advisors in connection with
tax shelter activity and which are intended to have certain deterrent and
punitive aspects.13
The Joint Committee staff spent considerable time analyzing a variety of recent
transactions that have given rise to recent Congressional or Administrative re-
sponses. The Joint Committee staff economists analyzed the economic considerations
that affect corporate taxpayers’ decisions with respect to engaging in tax shelter ac-
tivity. The Joint Committee staff consulted with representatives of the Treasury De-
partment, and reviewed various comments and proposals that have been put for-
ward with regard to corporate tax shelters, including:
(1) The Administration’s proposals that were included in the FY 2000 Budg-
et, as supplemented by the Treasury White Paper on corporate tax shelters,
(2) H.R. 2255, The Abusive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act of 1999, introduced
on June 17, 1999 by Congressman Doggett and others,
(3) Comments and recommendations submitted by various groups to this
Committee and the Senate Committee on Finance, including groups such as
the Tax Executives Institute, the American Bar Association Section of Tax-
ation, the New York State Bar Association Tax Section, and the American
Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and
(4) Comments that were submitted to the Joint Committee staff in connec-
tion with the Joint Committee staff study.
III. ANALYSIS
In analyzing the effectiveness of the present-law penalty provisions with respect
to corporate tax shelters, the Joint Committee staff first addressed two fundamental
questions. The first question is whether there is, in fact, a corporate tax shelter
problem. If there is a corporate tax shelter problem, the second question is why such
a problem exists.
A. The Corporate Tax Shelter Problem
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
43
14Monthly Treasury Statement regarding Budget Results for Fiscal Year 1999, Department
of the Treasury (October 27, 1999).
15 157 F.3d 231 (3d Cir. 1998), aff’g 73 T.C.M. (CCH) 2189 (1997).
16 113 T.C. No. 17 (September 21, 1999).
17 113 T.C. No. 21 (October 19, 1999).
The Joint Committee staff believes that there is a corporate tax shelter problem—
more corporations are entering into arrangements principally to avoid tax. The Joint
Committee staff believes the problem is becoming widespread and significant.
Some commentators and interested parties question whether there is a corporate
tax shelter problem. They contend that the heightened scrutiny the issue has re-
ceived this year is mostly attributable to recent press reports. These commentators
cite the lack of economic data showing a decline in corporate tax receipts as an indi-
cation that no problem exists.
Admittedly, much of the evidence in this area is anecdotal, as one might expect,
but the importance of this evidence should not be discounted. The parties involved
in developing, marketing, or implementing a tax shelter generally benefit by keep-
ing its existence confidential. For example, some firms intentionally limit the sale
of a corporate tax shelter that involves tens of millions of dollars in tax savings to
only a few taxpayers in an attempt to shield the arrangement from scrutiny by the
Congress and the Treasury Department. The existence of the tax shelter is revealed
only when a potential customer or a competitor anonymously disclosed the arrange-
ment to a government official.
Recent data would suggest that corporate tax receipts are not keeping pace with
a growing economy. Data just released shows that for fiscal year 1999, corporate in-
come tax receipts actually fell by approximately $4 billion, representing a decline
of approximately two percent, from the prior fiscal year.14 The last year in which
there was a decline in corporate tax receipts was in fiscal year 1990, a period in
which the economy was softening and entering the brief recession which began in
the last half of 1990.
Commentators and interested parties have relied on macroeconomic data to reach
differing opinions regarding whether there is a corporate tax shelter problem. The
Joint Committee staff believes that the data are not sufficiently refined to provide
a reliable measure of the corporate tax shelter activity. Many tax shelter trans-
actions distort the reported measure of corporate profits in a manner similar to
their impact on the corporate tax base. Other factors include year-to-year changes
in corporate economic losses and the increased use of non-corporate entities.
The Joint Committee staff believes that direct measurement of corporate tax shel-
ter activity through macroeconomic data is not possible. Instead of focusing on mac-
roeconomic data, a more instructive approach is to analyze specific tax shelter trans-
actions that have come to light and evaluate their effect on corporate receipts. Be-
cause this approach only considers a few of the corporate tax shelter transactions,
it necessarily understates the size of the corporate tax shelter problem. This ap-
proach, nonetheless, provides a useful reference point for consideration of the size
of the problem. In the past two years, the courts have disallowed tax benefits in
several high-profile corporate tax shelter cases. For example, in ACM Partnership
v. Commissioner,15 the Third Circuit Court of Appeals disallowed a capital loss
claimed in 1991 from a partnership arrangement because the arrangement lacked
economic substance. The amount of the tax savings with respect to this case was
approximately $30 million. The Joint Committee staff understands that there are
at least eight other cases which raise issues similar to those described in the ACM
case. The Joint Committee staff further understands that the amount in controversy
from these cases (which may span several tax years), when added to the tax benefit
at issue in ACM, would total approximately $1 billion in taxes.
A second recent corporate tax shelter case is Compaq Computer Corp. v. Commis-
sioner.16 In the Compaq case, the Tax Court disallowed a foreign tax credit claimed
in 1992 with respect to a dividend from stock in a foreign corporation. The taxpayer
bought and sold the stock within one hour in an arrangement that was structured
to eliminate the taxpayer’s economic risk from owning the stock. The disallowed tax
credit in the Compaq case would have resulted in a tax benefit of approximately
$3 million. The Joint Committee staff understands that there may be at least 15
other cases which raise issues similar to those described in the Compaq case. The
Joint Committee staff further understands that, when added to amount at issue in
the Compaq case, the total amount in controversy with respect to these cases, which
may span several tax years, is approximately $60 million in taxes.
A third recent corporate tax shelter case is Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc. v. Commis-
sioner.17 In the Winn-Dixie case, the Tax Court disallowed the interest deductions
attributable to the taxpayer’s 1993 leveraged corporate-owned life insurance
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
44
18The Joint Committee staff study identified other factors that have contributed to the in-
creasing trend of corporate tax shelter activity. These factors are: (1) the emerging view of a
corporate tax department as a profit center; (2) the relatively insufficient risk of penalties or
other significant deterrents for entering into such transactions; (3) the role of tax advisor opin-
ions in mitigating any risk of penalties; and (4) the insufficiency of standards of practice and
the lack of enforcement of such standards.
(‘‘COLI’’) program on the grounds that it lacked both economic substance and busi-
ness purpose. The amount of purported tax savings in the Winn-Dixie case was ap-
proximately $1.6 million for one year of an arrangement that was intended to yield
tax benefits annually over a 60-year period. The Joint Committee staff understands
that there may be as many as 100 cases in controversy which raise issues similar
to those described in the Winn-Dixie case. The Joint Committee staff also under-
stands that the amount in controversy with respect to these cases, which may span
several tax years, is expected to approach approximately $6 billion in taxes.
Looking only at the three arrangements that were at issue in these cases, it is
estimated that these cases represent over $7 billion in unpaid corporate taxes (ap-
proximately $1 billion from ACM and similar cases, approximately $60 million from
Compaq and similar cases, and approximately $6 billion from Winn-Dixie and simi-
lar cases). Although these cases represent different tax years, this amount most
likely represents a fraction of the corporate tax that the Federal government is not
collecting because of corporate tax shelters. In many cases, the corporation that
claims the tax benefits from a tax shelter escapes audit, or the tax shelter arrange-
ment goes undetected during an audit. Even when the corporation is audited and
the transaction is discovered, the hazards of litigation, the complexities of these
transactions, and other factors are such that the IRS often may opt for a negotiated
settlement. Only a fraction of tax shelter activity actually results in a judicial deter-
mination. In addition, as the these cases illustrate, several years may pass before
a judicial determination is made with respect to a corporate tax shelter transaction,
during which time similar transactions go undeterred. Thus, even though the out-
come of the recent cases generally is favorable to the government, the case law (1)
cannot be viewed to be representative of the full magnitude of the problem, and (2)
cannot be considered as evidence that the corporate tax shelter problem is being
contained.
An additional observation regarding the effect of tax shelters on corporate tax re-
ceipts bears discussion. The magnitude of the problem, be it a $10 million loss or
a $10 billion loss, is in some respects a secondary issue. Practitioners indicate they
are spending more of their time advising corporate clients regarding arrangements
that are highly suspect, and tax executives complain they are getting ‘‘pitched’’ more
and more ‘‘aggressive’’ transactions from promoters and advisors that are solely mo-
tivated to reduce the corporation’s effective tax rate without any relation to a nontax
business purpose or economic substance. Practitioners and corporate tax executives
feel pressured to participate in such transactions, particularly when it appears that
the corporation’s competitor is doing a similar transaction and getting professional
advice that such a transaction can avoid penalties because the professional advisor
is willing to opine that the transaction is ‘‘more likely than not’’ to succeed. The per-
ception of potentially becoming competitively disadvantaged by others engaging in
a tax-motivated transaction could result in more corporations and tax advisors en-
gaging in these types of transactions. If one corporation is permitted to claim an
unwarranted tax benefit that its competitors are reluctant to claim, then, in essence,
the corporations (and their advisors) that ‘‘play by the rules’’ are being penalized.
Many prominent professional associations, such as the American Bar Association,
the New York State Bar Association, the American Institute of Certified Public Ac-
countants, and the Tax Executives Institute, have voiced their concerns with the
growing presence of corporate tax shelters and their potentially harmful effects on
the Federal income tax system.
B. Why a Corporate Tax Shelter Problem Exists
Critical to a corporation’s decision of whether to enter into a tax shelter arrange-
ment is a comparison of the expected net tax benefits with the expected costs of the
arrangement. Such a ‘‘cost-benefit’’ analysis takes into account a corporate partici-
pant’s economic risks in the event the expected net tax benefits fail to materialize.
The imposition of a penalty should be a significant feature of the ‘‘cost’’ side of the
equation, and the Joint Committee staff focused on the cost-benefit analysis in de-
termining the effectiveness of the present-law penalty regime.
The Joint Committee staff believes present law does not provide sufficient dis-
incentives to engaging in these types of transactions.18 The cost-benefit analysis is
skewed in favor of investing in corporate tax shelter transactions. There are signifi-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
45
19Corporations do not act alone in designing ways to avoid paying their fair share of taxes.
Many other parties act in concert with the corporate taxpayer to facilitate such devices. As a
result, the Joint Committee staff study recommends that the stakes (and standards) should be
raised for these other participants as well, and disclosure should be required of promoters of
corporate tax shelter activity.
20 Treas. Reg. sec. 1.6664–4(e).
cant potential benefits from entering into a corporate tax shelter transaction with
little corresponding cost. The chances of a corporation being subject to a penalty
from a corporate tax shelter are small. The Joint Committee staff believes that the
cost of entering into abusive tax arrangements should be increased to deter this
type of activity.19 The most effective means of realigning the cost-benefit calculus
is to clarify and enhance the present-law penalty regime.
C. Clarifying and Enhancing the Present-Law Penalty Regime
Although the present-law penalty regime includes certain specific provisions
aimed at corporate tax shelters, the Joint Committee staff believes that the present-
law structure is ineffective at deterring inappropriate corporate tax shelter activity.
Nevertheless, the present-law penalty regime provides a useful framework from
which refinements and improvements can be made. Moreover, because the policy
considerations that gave rise to enactment of that framework in the first place (i.e.,
deterrence of tax shelter activity) is just as true today, the present-law penalty re-
gime appears to be the appropriate starting point in addressing the undesirable cor-
porate shelter activity. The Joint Committee staff recommendations therefore focus
on clarifying and enhancing the present law corporate tax shelter penalty regime.
A meaningful penalty regime would alter the cost-benefit analysis of corporate par-
ticipants in a manner that will discourage abusive transactions without interfering
with legitimate business activity.
D. Alternative Responses
Maintaining the status quo
Some argue that no legislative response to the corporate tax shelter problem is
necessary; the present-law penalty regime would be effective in deterring corporate
tax shelter activity if only (1) the Treasury Department would issue long-overdue
guidance with respect to the penalty regime, and (2) the IRS would enforce the ex-
isting rules. The Joint Committee staff believes the present-law penalty structure
contains a number of structural weaknesses that significantly undermine its effec-
tiveness. Some of the weaknesses may be attributable to a lack of statutory guid-
ance with respect to recent legislation regarding corporate tax shelters. For exam-
ple, the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 amended the definition of a corporate tax shel-
ter to cover any entity, plan or arrangement entered into by a corporate participant
if a ‘‘significant purpose’’ is the avoidance or evasion of Federal income tax. How-
ever, there appears to be much uncertainty, both in the Treasury Department and
in the business community, as to what constitutes a ‘‘significant purpose’’ and no
guidance has been issued by the Treasury Department. At the same time, the lack
of statutory guidance could subject any regulatory guidance to criticism for exer-
cising too much discretion and exceeding statutory authority in resolving these
issues.
In addition, it appears that penalties are rarely collected in connection with tax
shelters. The lack of imposition of present-law penalties may be, in part, a result
of a lack of statutory guidance. For example, the facts and circumstances necessary
to satisfy the reasonable cause exception to the substantial understatement penalty
attributable to corporate tax shelters20 is widely disputed. Some tax professionals
believe an opinion from a tax advisor is all that is necessary. Others believe that
if the test in the regulations were enforced, few taxpayers would ever avoid this
penalty. Given the wide range of interpretations, it is not surprising that the IRS
generally waives the imposition of this penalty whenever a corporate taxpayer pro-
duces a favorable opinion letter from a professional tax advisor.
Another shortcoming of the section 6662 penalty for corporate tax shelters is that
the penalty generally applies (in the absence of negligence) only if the understate-
ment of tax is ‘‘substantial.’’ For a corporation, an understatement is substantial
only if it exceeds 10 percent of the tax that is required to be shown on the return
(or if greater, $10,000). A corporation therefore can engage in corporate tax shelter
activities knowing that it will not be subject to an understatement penalty provided
that the tax benefit does not exceed this 10 percent threshold. For a large corpora-
tion, this can represent a significant amount. In addition, the penalty applies only
if there is an overall underpayment of income tax for the taxable year, regardless
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
46
21 Joint Committee staff study includes a recommendation that would eliminate the substan-
tial understatement penalty attributable to corporate tax shelters only if the corporate partici-
pant is ‘‘highly confident’’ (i.e., reasonably believes that there is at least 75-percent chance that
the tax treatment would be sustained on the merits). In addition, the Joint Committee staff rec-
ommends raising the minimum standards for tax return positions for both taxpayers and tax
preparers.
22See Barton Massey, ‘‘Circular 230 Changes Unlikely to Address Shelters or Practice of
Law,’’ 1999 TNT 206–5, (Doc 1999–34521), October 26, 1999.
23The imposition of penalties may be a continuing issue in the ACM case.
of whether the tax return understates taxable income with respect to a specific
transaction. As a result, a taxpayer could use overpayment items to offset the un-
derpayment from a corporate tax shelter and thereby avoid a penalty.
Maintaining the status-quo also results in greater pressure to address each spe-
cific tax shelter transaction separately. Although in recent years there has been a
flurry of legislative activity aimed at specific corporate tax shelters, such ad-hoc re-
sponses, by their very nature, rarely are enacted in a timely manner. These re-
sponses typically do not occur until after there has been significant loss in revenue.
Also, because legislative changes generally apply on a prospective basis, corpora-
tions that engage in this activity early during the ‘‘life cycle’’ of a corporate tax shel-
ter often retain the inappropriate tax savings. When the changes are not entirely
prospective, a fairness concern is raised insofar as taxpayers may not have sufficient
notice that the legislative changes will have affected their transaction. And as a re-
alistic matter, the government may never become aware of some transactions that
would be considered as abusive corporate tax shelters.
Changing the cost-benefit calculus should deter taxpayers from entering into cor-
porate tax shelters. While it is true that the IRS has won several recent tax shelter
cases, litigation is an inefficient deterrent (because of the uncertainties of the audit
process, the costs and hazards of litigation, delays in resolution, and similar reasons
previously discussed), and the status quo does not provide sufficient disincentives
for taxpayers to engage in tax shelter transactions.
The problems with the present law penalty regime extend beyond taxpayer sanc-
tions. There is little guidance and enforcement of standards for tax shelter opinions.
If an advisor provides an opinion to protect a taxpayer from penalty, there is little
or no risk of sanction to the advisor if the opinion is later determined to be im-
proper. The American Bar Association Tax Section recently suggested changes to
the standards of practice before the IRS, known as Circular 230, which imposes
some standards on tax shelter opinions. These suggestions are a good first step.
However, the ABA Tax Section’s suggestions are predicated on the present-law
‘‘more likely than not’’ standard, which the Joint Committee staff believes should
be raised.21 The Joint Committee staff study includes recommendations on how the
current rules under Circular 230 should be revised to regulate the conduct of practi-
tioners as it relates to corporate tax shelters. Unfortunately, the IRS Director of
Practice recently stated that, although the IRS could be proposing changes to Cir-
cular 230 next spring, these proposals are unlikely to tackle any ‘‘controversial
issues’’ such as modifications to tax shelters.22 Such a noncommittal response illus-
trates that Congress should provide the IRS with strong guidance on how to address
the tax shelter issue.
A substantive law change
Some believe that clarifying and strengthening the penalty rules would be insuffi-
cient unless changes are also made to substantive tax law. The Joint Committee
staff believes the substantive rules, including the common law doctrines, provide a
sufficient, well-developed body of law for corporations to consider when evaluating
tax shelter arrangements. The problem is not that the IRS lacked the necessary
tools to challenge the transaction, nor can it be said that each taxpayer was un-
aware of the common-law doctrines. For example, the courts in each of the cases
previously discussed—the ACM case, the Compaq case, and the Winn-Dixie case—
relied on well-known, long-standing common-law doctrines to disallow the claimed
tax benefits. The problem is that, from an economic (i.e., cost-benefit) perspective,
the taxpayer concluded that it had little (if any) financial risk by going forward with
the transaction. One only needs to look at the imposition of penalties in the cases.
Neither the ACM case nor the Winn-Dixie case makes reference to penalties.23 In
the Compaq case, the Tax Court imposed a negligence penalty under section 6662,
though the facts are somewhat unusual in that the taxpayer did not seek an opinion
of counsel, and the court noted how the corporate officer did little due diligence (and
shredded the spreadsheet). In other words, there seems to be sufficient, well-devel-
oped case law that is flexible and adaptable to address the substantive issue of
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
47
24The Joint Committee staff study identified five common characteristics of modern corporate
tax shelter transactions. These characteristics are: (1) an arrangement in which the reasonably
expected pre-tax profit is insignificant when compared with the expected tax benefits; (2) the
involvement of a tax-indifferent participant; (3) the use of guarantees, tax indemnities and simi-
lar arrangements, including contingent fee structures; (4) a difference between tax reporting and
financial statement reporting, especially where permanent differences arise; and (5) the lack of
any appreciable change in economic position, particularly when a corporation does not take on
any additional economic risk. Any corporate transaction which exhibits one of these characteris-
tics (‘‘;tax shelter indicator’’) should be considered to have a significant purpose of avoiding or
evading Federal income tax for purposes of an understatement penalty.
whether a tax shelter exists. What is lacking is a meaningful penalty structure that
would significantly alter the cost-benefit calculus.
Another important concern with enacting a substantive rule is the inherent dif-
ficulty of crafting a rule that is sensitive to the tax system’s reliance on objective,
rule-based criteria while at the same time does not impede legitimate business
transactions from going forward. A substantive law change should be precise so as
to target abusive transactions but not affect legitimate business transactions. The
difficulty lies in crafting a definition of a ‘‘tax shelter.’’ There can be significant dis-
putes as to whether a particular transaction is a tax shelter. This is why the Joint
Committee staff study identifies certain common characteristics of corporate tax
shelter arrangements, referred to as ‘‘tax shelter indicators,’’ 24 which, if present in
an arrangement, would result in an understatement penalty only after a determina-
tion that the arrangement caused an understatement of the corporate participant’s
tax liability. Thus, it is not enough that the arrangement appears to be a tax shel-
ter; there must be a determination that the tax treatment was improper and the
taxpayer must have had less than a high level of confidence that the tax treatment
was proper in order for a penalty to be imposed. This relieves much of the pressure
of crafting a precise definition of a corporate tax shelter, which would exist if a sub-
stantive law change was adopted.
E. Summary
In summary, the cost-benefit analysis should be altered to discourage corporations
from entering into abusive transactions without affecting legitimate business trans-
actions. An enhanced penalty structure with more detailed disclosure requirements
and more stringent standards for other participants in the corporate tax shelter
would strike the appropriate balance and alter the cost-benefit analysis in a manner
that would provide a sufficient deterrent effect.
IV. SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS
Consistent with its analysis and conclusions, the Joint Committee staff rec-
ommends the following with respect to corporate tax shelters.
Recommendations that affect corporations which participate in corporate tax shel-
ters
A. Clarify the definition of a corporate tax shelter for purposes of the understate-
ment penalty with the addition of several ‘‘tax shelter indicators.’’ This rec-
ommendation builds on the present-law definition of a corporate tax shelter found
in section 6662 (the accuracy related penalty). Under that definition, a tax shelter
exists if a significant purpose of a partnership, or other entity, plan, or arrangement
is the avoidance or evasion of Federal income tax. The recommendation expounds
upon that definition by providing certain ‘‘indicators’’ that if present will cause a
partnership, or other entity, plan or arrangement in which a corporation is a partici-
pant to be considered to have a significant purpose of avoidance or evasion of Fed-
eral income tax.
The indicators were developed from what we found to be common characteristics
of corporate tax shelters. At the same time, so as to ensure that there will be no
interruption to legitimate business activity, the list excludes many common charac-
teristics and is narrowly tailored to avoid any overreaching. Most importantly, the
indicators themselves do not cause a penalty to be created. The penalty is imposed
only if an understatement exists—meaning that a determination has been made (for
example, by losing in court) that the tax benefits related to a transaction were im-
proper an not permitted under present law. The indicators are:
(1) The reasonably expected pre-tax profit from the arrangement is insig-
nificant relative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits.
(2) The arrangement involves a tax-indifferent participant, and the arrange-
ment (1) results in taxable income materially in excess of economic income
to the tax-indifferent participant, (2) permits a corporate participant to
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00051 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
48
characterize items of income, gain, loss, deductions, or credits in a more fa-
vorable manner than it otherwise could without the involvement of the tax-
indifferent participant, or (3) results in a noneconomic increase, creation,
multiplication, or shifting of basis for the benefit of the corporate partici-
pant, and results in the recognition of income or gain that is not subject
to Federal income tax because the tax consequences are borne by the tax-
indifferent participant.
(3) The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are sig-
nificant, and the arrangement involves a tax indemnity or similar agree-
ment for the benefit of the corporate participant other than a customary in-
demnity agreement in an acquisition or other business transaction entered
into with a principal in the transaction.
(4) The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are sig-
nificant, and the arrangement is reasonably expected to create a ‘‘perma-
nent difference’’ for U.S. financial reporting purposes under generally ac-
cepted accounting principles.
(5) The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are sig-
nificant, and the arrangement is designed so that the corporate participant
incurs little (if any) additional economic risk as a result of entering into the
arrangement.
B. An entity, plan, or arrangement can still be a tax shelter even though it does
not display any of the tax shelter indicators, provided that a significant purpose is
the avoidance or evasion of Federal income tax.
C. Modify the penalty so that, with respect to a corporate tax shelter, there would
be no requirement that the understatement be substantial.
D. Increase the understatement penalty rate from 20 percent to 40 percent for any
understatement that is attributable to a corporate tax shelter. The IRS would not
have the discretion to waive the understatement penalty in settlement negotiations
or otherwise for corporate tax shelters.
E. Provide that the 40-percent penalty could be completely abated (i.e., no penalty
would apply) if the corporate taxpayer establishes that it satisfies certain abatement
requirements. Foremost among the abatement requirements is that the corporate
participant believes there is at least a 75-percent likelihood that the tax treatment
would be sustained on the merits. Another requirement for complete abatement in-
volves disclosure of certain information that is certified by the chief financial officer
or another senior corporate officer with knowledge of the facts.
F. Provide that the 40-percent penalty would be reduced to 20 percent if certain
required disclosures are made, provided that the understatement is attributable to
a position with respect to the tax shelter for which the corporate participant has
substantial authority in support of such position.
G. Require a corporate participant that must pay an understatement penalty of
at least $1 million in connection with a corporate tax shelter to disclose such fact
to its shareholders. The disclosure would include the amount of the penalty and the
factual setting under which the penalty was imposed.
Recommendations that affect other parties involved in corporate tax shelters
A. Increase the penalty for aiding and abetting with respect to an understatement
of a corporate tax liability attributable to a corporate tax shelter from $10,000 to
the greater of $100,000 or one-half the fees related to the transaction.
B. Expand the scope of the aiding and abetting penalty to apply to any person
who assists or advises with respect to the creation, implementation, or reporting of
a corporate tax shelter that results in an understatement penalty if (1) the person
knew or had reason to believe that the corporate tax shelter could result in an un-
derstatement of tax, (2) the person opined or advised the corporate participant that
there existed at least a 75-percent likelihood that the tax treatment would be sus-
tained on the merits if challenged, and (3) a reasonable tax practitioner would not
have believed that there existed at least a 75-percent likelihood that the tax treat-
ment would be sustained on the merits if challenged.
C. Require the publication of the names of any person penalized under the aiding
and abetting provision and an automatic referral of the person to the IRS Director
of Practice.
D. Clarify the U.S. government’s authority to bring injunctive actions against per-
sons who promote or aid and abet in connection with corporate tax shelters.
E. Include the explicit statutory authorization for Circular 230 in Title 26 of the
United States Code and authorize the imposition of monetary sanctions.
F. Recommend that, with respect to corporate tax shelters, Treasury amend Cir-
cular 230 generally to (1) revise its definitions, (2) expand its scope, and (3) provide
more meaningful enforcement measures (such as the imposition of monetary sanc-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00052 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
49
tions, automatic referral to the Director of Practice upon the imposition of any prac-
titioner penalty, publication of the names of practitioners that receive letters of rep-
rimand, and automatic notification to state licensing authorities of any disciplinary
actions taken by the Director of Practice).
DISCLOSURE AND REGISTRATION OBLIGATIONS
A. Corporate taxpayer disclosure
(1) 30-day disclosure.—Arrangements that are described by a tax shelter indicator
and in which the expected net tax benefits are at least $1 million would be required
to satisfy certain disclosure requirements within 30-days of entering into the ar-
rangement.
• The 30-day disclosure would include a summary of the relevant facts and as-
sumptions, the expected net tax benefits, each tax shelter indicator that describes
the arrangement, the analysis and legal rationale, the business purpose, and the ex-
istence of any contingent fee arrangements.
• The chief financial officer or another senior corporate officer with knowledge of
the facts would be required to certify, under penalties of perjury, that the disclosure
statements are true, accurate, and complete.
(2) Tax-return disclosure.—Arrangements that are described by a tax shelter indi-
cator (regardless of the amount of net tax benefits) would be required to satisfy cer-
tain tax-return disclosure requirements.
• The tax-return disclosure would include a copy of any required 30-day
disclosure.
• The tax-return disclosure also would identify which tax shelter indicators
describe one or more arrangements reflected on the return.
B. Tax shelter registration
(1) Modify the present-law rules regarding the registration of corporate tax shel-
ters by (1) deleting the confidentiality requirement, (2) increasing the fee threshold
from $100,000 to $1 million, and (3) expanding the scope of the registration require-
ment to cover any corporate tax shelter that is reasonably expected to be presented
to more than one participant.
(1) Require additional information reporting with respect to the registration of tax
shelter arrangements that are described by a tax shelter indicator. The additional
information would include the claimed tax treatment and summary of authorities,
the tax shelter indicator(s) that describes the arrangement, and certain calculations
relating to the arrangement.
V. CONCLUSION
The Joint Committee staff believes that a corporate tax shelter problem exists,
and the problem is becoming widespread and significant. The Joint Committee staff
further believes that increasing the penalties for engaging in corporate tax shelters
would sufficiently alter the cost-benefit analysis with respect to engaging in such
transactions and would provide a measured response to the corporate tax shelter
problem. The Joint Committee staff’s analysis and specific recommendations are dis-
cussed in more detail in the Joint Committee staff study.
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to present the Joint Committee staff
recommendations on corporate tax shelters, and I would be happy to answer any
questions the Committee may have at this time and in the future.
[Attachments are being retained in the Committee files.]
f
Mr. HOUGHTON. Mr. Hulshof.
Mr. HULSHOF. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Talisman, does the Treasury Department endorse Mr.
Doggett’s bill in its current form?
Mr. TALISMAN. There are a number of similarities between Mr.
Doggett’s bill and our bill, including codification of the economic
substance doctrine, increasing disclosure and increasing the sub-
stantial understatement penalty. We agree with that approach. We
obviously had a slightly different manner of codifying the economic
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00053 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
50
substance doctrine and would be happy to work with Mr. Doggett
and the rest of the tax writing staff as we do in crafting the correct
language to codify the economic substance.
Mr. HULSHOF. So the answer is yes and no.
Mr. TALISMAN. I think it is largely yes.
Mr. HULSHOF. In a letter that the Treasury wrote, I think maybe
you penned to Mr. Doggett, you indicated that it was the Treas-
ury’s belief that his bill would not—and I am paraphrasing—would
not unduly interfere with legitimate business transactions. Should
we be considering anything that interferes at all with legitimate
business transactions?
Mr. TALISMAN. Well, in order to identify corporate tax shelters,
the disclosure provisions will be crafted in a way that uses par-
ticular filters to ensure that the transactions are disclosed. Some
transactions that will be disclosed will be legitimate business
transactions. At that point the Service will apply the economic sub-
stance doctrine in a manner that would not, we believe, either un-
duly or duly affect legitimate business transactions because it is
merely—again, our approach and Mr. Doggett’s approach are mere-
ly codifications of the current economic substance doctrine which
already applies.
Mr. HULSHOF. Again, I guess what I think we have to guard
against, we, all of us, is legislating based on hyperbole or legis-
lating based on the bad case. My law school tax professor told me
that bad cases make bad law. And it is one thing for us on this
side to rail against $450 bottles of cabernet and whether the meal
allowance deduction is proper, when, in fact, information from the
Treasury Department, as Mr. McCrery pointed out yesterday, is
that the average business meal costs $11.61.
So the other thing I wanted to ask you about is do you believe
right now that Treasury has insufficient antiabuse tools available?
And while you are munching on that, let me just specifically point
out—and I wasn’t here in 1995, but this Committee talked about
and proposed requiring registration of corporate tax shelters. That
was included in the measure that the President eventually vetoed.
But finally, I think, in the Treasury’s green book that accompanied
the President’s fiscal year budget for fiscal year 1997 said that re-
quiring registration of corporate tax shelters would be something
very useful. So as a result of that, this Committee and the House
and Senate included that. It was signed into law by the President
on August 5th of 1997.
So, here’s something that Treasury requested, Congress acted, in
an effort to crack down on these illegitimate corporate tax shelters,
and yet Treasury has, to my knowledge, as yet to issue any guid-
ance necessary to make that those rules take effect. Is that the
present state of affairs?
Mr. TALISMAN. That is correct. However, that legislation had as
part of the registration requirements three conditions for registra-
tion, one of which was issuance under conditions of confidentiality.
It is our understanding that the tax shelter promoters are now not
relying on conditions of confidentiality in large part because of the
potential application of those rules, and that they are relying more
on tacit understandings or other agreements to maintain the con-
fidentiality of the regs.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00054 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
51
Also, given that we were requesting additional guidance with re-
spect to the definition of corporate tax shelter, the current defini-
tion actually in that legislation is a significant purpose of tax
avoidance, which is a very broad standard and actually has been
interpreted by some to include all business transactions. We were
concerned about, when we were looking for a narrower approach,
codifying the economic substance doctrine to issue guidance that
would either have been considered too broad or too narrow depend-
ing on one’s view, and that when we were coming to Congress look-
ing for additional tools to attack corporate tax shelters, to come out
with guidance that might set us back.
Obviously we are looking at—certainly in the context of looking
at the prospect for legislation. We will review that decision in the
upcoming months.
Mr. HULSHOF. I would ask the Chairman to indulge me just as
a final comment, and, Ms. Paull, I didn’t have a chance to inquire,
but you mentioned beefing up the penalty scheme, which, again,
this Committee did in 1997 in a couple of different areas. You men-
tioned the specific cases by name that I think clearly those that are
interested, of course, read those opinions very carefully in deter-
mining how aggressive they want to be in marketing these types
of shelters. I would suggest to you Circular 230, which would be
another vehicle that Treasury could use to help implement and
guide those practitioners.
I mean, we all want to get to the same place. And I guess the
question that I am asking myself is do we need to go further
than—and we want to provide you the tools available, but the tools
we provided, I am not sure they have been aggressively used in an
effort to crack down. So I appreciate your work on this, and, Ms.
Paull, yours as well.
With that, I see my time has expired. I would yield back. Thank
you.
Mr. HOUGHTON. Thank you very much.
Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Paull, I am sure that the additional materials you submitted
will be useful and that I will learn from them. I would like to focus
on those that you filed back in July, the report and your oral com-
ments, because I find a number of areas of agreement. First you
indicate today that this is not only a serious problem, but it is a
growing problem as you see it and as your staff there on the Com-
mittee sees it.
Ms. PAULL. That is correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. I believe you indicated in the July 22nd report
that the—to use your words—that this corporate tax shelter phe-
nomenon poses a serious challenge to the efficacy of our entire tax
system.
Ms. PAULL. That is correct. I believe the Treasury Department
reiterated that today.
Mr. DOGGETT. And given the very serious nature of this problem,
though you and I may have slightly different ways of trying to get
at the problem, wouldn’t you agree that it would be a very serious
mistake for this Congress not to address legislatively the shelter
hustlers?
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00055 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
52
Ms. PAULL. This Congress? You are not suggesting today, right?
Mr. DOGGETT. I don’t mean tomorrow or Saturday, but during
the course of this particular Congress, perhaps the second session.
Ms. PAULL. I do believe that it is urgent. I also would have to
acknowledge that it is a very complicated issue, and that we hope
that this appendix will help you focus on the kinds of issues that
we and others have identified.
Mr. DOGGETT. I sure agree with you on that.
And as far as the remedies that you have advocated, one of them
is, I believe, on page 9 of your July 22nd report, disclosure obliga-
tions. And there are some additional disclosures that you think
would be appropriate for corporate tax shelters. I am not going to
go through them line by line, but the idea of some additional disclo-
sure, somewhat different perhaps than that that I provide in HR
2255, you think would be helpful?
Ms. PAULL. I do think disclosure would be helpful, but I don’t
think it is a panacea.
Mr. DOGGETT. I concur with you on both.
Is it your belief that it is possible to have some additional disclo-
sure requirements that will neither unduly nor duly interfere with
the operation of legitimate business?
Ms. PAULL. I do think it would be useful for some additional dis-
closure. I think you have to be realistic about the disclosure,
though, because certainly if you are going to take the approach of
your bill or the Treasury approach where you have put a cloud over
a variety of transactions, and then you ask people to come forward
and self-confess to those transactions, it is a lot more difficult to
get that kind of disclosure. On the other hand I can see a tremen-
dous benefit if we could get some early warning disclosure for ag-
gressive transactions somehow. And so there is a tension there be-
tween the kinds of proposals that you move forward.
Mr. DOGGETT. You certainly would disagree with someone who
would come forward and say it is a myth that we can’t have rea-
sonable disclosure requirements to deal with this problem?
Ms. PAULL. I think you can have reasonable disclosure require-
ments.
Mr. DOGGETT. Then with reference to the penalty provisions, al-
though we address it in a slightly different way, you and I agree
that we need to have heightened penalties.
Ms. PAULL. Correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. That is the principal focus of the joint tax report,
I believe.
Ms. PAULL. That is correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. I believe we also—though we deal with it in a
slightly different way, we also agree that there is a problem with
the opinion letter, what I call the excuse letter, that happens at
present, and that, again, you think you can heighten the standard
for it, but that it is not satisfactory to leave the law as it is now
with reference to these opinion letters that perhaps the same tax
hustler that provided the tax shelter recommends the law firm that
is going to say it is okay.
Ms. PAULL. We feel strongly that the standards for preparing
opinion letters should be elevated, and let me just point out we also
feel strongly that with respect to other kinds of penalties outside
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00056 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
53
of the corporate tax shelter area, that the standards filing tax re-
turns and getting out of penalties ought to be elevated as well. And
that is also covered in our study, but not the subject of this hear-
ing, because it is a corporate tax shelter hearing.
Mr. DOGGETT. With regard to this tension between trying to have
enough certainty for a taxpayer to be able to rely and comply
versus not providing a road map for hustlers to avoid the law, you
have used in some of your recommendations terms that aren’t all
that different from ″substantial″ and ″meaningful″ in different con-
texts, haven’t you?
Ms. PAULL. This is the most difficult thing to deal with is how
you define the corporate tax shelter. For our recommendations, we
defined it for purposes of determining a penalty after you have ap-
plied the common law doctrines and you found an understatement
of tax.
Mr. DOGGETT. You are aware that one of our later witnesses Mr.
Hariton thinks your definitions are more vague than he thinks my
definitions are vague.
Ms. PAULL. Well, this is one of the most difficult parts of this ex-
ercise.
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Chairman, I have got other questions for Mr.
Talisman, but perhaps after some other witnesses.
Mr. HOUGHTON. Okay. Thanks very much.
Mr. Tanner.
Mr. TANNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to follow up. I am sorry I was late, but your testi-
mony, I have heard, has been enlightening from the standpoint
that all of us desire a clear—as clear a standard as we can have,
both from the practitioner standpoint as well as the company as
well as our standpoint and, I assume, yours.
And the, I think, common concern shared by all who approach
this problem is to what extent this bill or these proposals impede
unnecessarily on the legitimate pursuit of prudent business prac-
tices as it relates to the Tax Code as it may be written now or in
the future.
Is it your position that—let me back up. I realize, as you said,
this is a—there is no easy definition, and it is probably a moving
target as innovations take place, as they normally do in the mar-
ketplace of ideas, which makes it more—all the more complicated.
What I guess my question is to what extent have you thought
about the proposals impacting negatively on legitimate transactions
when there is this acknowledged vagueness as it relates to the
standard? Could you finish your comment that you were making to
Mr. Doggett on that, please?
Ms. PAULL. Sure. Well, as I said, it is very difficult to define or
corporate tax shelter. Mr. Doggett’s testimony quoted Michael
Graetz from Yale, defining it to be a deal done by very smart peo-
ple that, absent tax considerations, would be very stupid. Now, that
is a nice way to look at it, but you—when you are crafting rules
of law, you need to have rules of law that are susceptible to some
interpretation. I think this is really where you have a tension. Do
you attempt to codify a very flexible set of court-made law into the
Code? We come down against that. Mr. Doggett and the Treasury
Department come down in favor of it. And I would just have to say
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00057 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
54
Mr. Doggett’s formulation of those standards is elevated over the
common law, court-made law.
Mr. TANNER. So you say the threat——
Ms. PAULL. That is where you get into the legitimate business
transactions. Transactions that might pass muster today under
court-made law will have more difficulty passing muster under Mr.
Doggett’s standard, I would just point that out. That is one of the
principal reasons why our estimate of Mr. Doggett’s bill is higher
than the Treasury proposal. Mr. Doggett’s bill goes further and also
picks up individuals. There are another smaller factors as well.
I hope that is somewhat responsive. If you are going to try to
codify the common law, then you must rely on things like what Mr.
Doggett does and the Treasury Department does in terms of ex-
emptions from it. You have got to go down that road, and that be-
comes very political. You must develop list of good things.
I do have a series of common business transactions I could go
over with you to show, they don’t pass muster under the basic tests
under these bills. Then you have to rely on the Treasury Depart-
ment adding to Mr. Doggett’s list of good transactions, or getting
out under this very vague standard of ‘‘clearly contemplated by the
law.’’ What does that mean? Because I will tell you, we went back
and looked at the low-income housing tax credit. That is intended
for people to make an investment that they would not otherwise
make. The tax breaks make that an economic investment for the
most part. When you look at the written legislative history behind
that tax credit, you can’t find that notion in there. So does that
mean it wasn’t clearly contemplated by the law that this tax credit
is going to make up the difference to make it an economic invest-
ment? This is really a difficult area that the Committee is going
to have to grapple with.
Mr. TANNER. Do you have a comment?
Mr. TALISMAN. Yes. I believe, first of all, from our standpoint
codification of the economic substance doctrine is necessary because
it ensures the taxpayers are applying the right economic substance
doctrine at a level that is appropriate to these transactions. We ob-
viously would build in mechanisms to protect against inappropriate
application of the doctrine.
As I talked about, an expedited ruling process, the centralization
of the IRS review process and coordination at the national office
would all protect against application to transactions that are legiti-
mate ordinary-course-of-business transactions. But companies need
to be discouraged from engaging in engineered transactions that
have no relation to their core business.
And so we think that the codification of that doctrine will ensure
that they will apply it to each transaction before the fact rather
than after the fact and wait for judge-made law many years after
the fact to shut down these transactions, and that is our concern.
I also think that it is appropriate to point out that the recent
cases have used the standard comparison of pretax profit to the ex-
pected tax benefits, which is the standard we are applying. And the
ABA has a similar approach in their testimony where they say any
time the economic substance doctrine would apply, you would use
effectively the standard, which is the—what we think is sort of the
articulation of the best of the case law.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00058 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
55
Mr. TANNER. Well, I have another, but I see my time has expired,
Mr. Chairman, and I am very aware of the Chairman’s apprecia-
tion of time. So I will yield back.
Mr. HOUGHTON. Okay. Thanks very much.
Mr. Becerra.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Paull, Mr. Talisman, let me ask you a question with regard
to what Treasury has currently in place. It seems at this point the
testimony we have heard speaks to the issue of tax shelters and
the need to perhaps increase penalties. There seems to be full
agreement on that. There seems to be disagreement on how far you
need to go beyond beefing up penalties and the like.
Let me ask you about your particular shop within Treasury. To
what degree could this whole issue—and if you want to define it
as a problem—this whole issue or problem be addressed simply
through more aggressive enforcement by IRS of these concerns
with tax shelters?
Mr. TALISMAN. Well, again, I think aggressive enforcement is cer-
tainly an appropriate response to these shelter activities. I don’t
think it is a panacea to the problem. We have already, as we have
discussed, one case recently in the Tax Court and cases elsewhere
applying the economic substance doctrine to cases. However those
cases occurred in the 1990s, early 1990s, and promoters and par-
ticipants have moved on to other transactions which arguably do
not meet the facts of the cases to which the taxpayers lost pre-
viously.
We also have aggressively sought legislation to shut down shel-
ters of which we are aware and also, when appropriate, used our
authority to address specific shelters either by ruling or regulation.
Recently we issued a regulation dealing with the so-called
Chutzpah Trust, son of Accelerated Charitable Remainder Trust. In
1997, Congress passed legislation shutting down accelerated—
abuse of uses of accelerated charitable remainder trusts, and so
this was a similar device. So it shows that taxpayers are willing
to move on to the next product whenever they can.
Mr. BECERRA. If you were to try to enhance your enforcement ac-
tivity or accelerate it, would one of the net results be you would
end up being more intrusive, you would have to engage in more in-
trusive behavior to try to ferret out any abusive activity in tax
shelter activities that occur?
Mr. TALISMAN. I believe that identification, up front identifica-
tion of these transactions is important, and certainly something
that I believe all the parties, certainly the joint Committee, Mr.
Doggett, and us have all proposed. We hope that will help limit the
intrusion. And frankly, one of the reasons we came forward—and
we actually have modified our original proposal to provide objective
filters, more objective filters based on the characteristics of cor-
porate tax shelters that we have identified to try and limit the in-
trusiveness, to focus on those transaction most likely to be tax-en-
gineered abusive transactions.
Mr. BECERRA. Ms. Paull, if we were to not take any action in the
near term and rely only on what we have in place, if we were to
try to have greater success in trying to diminish the use of these
shelters, would it not lead us to having to go towards more aggres-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00059 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
56
sive enforcement and, based on what Mr. Talisman has said, prob-
ably more intrusive behavior in trying to reduce the amount of tax
shelter abuse that might occur?
Ms. PAULL. Well, certainly one would hope the IRS would be
prioritizing the corporate tax shelter items at this point in time
after all that has been said before Congress this year. So that is
number one. I mean, clearly enforcement is an issue, and the IRS
ought to be going after these transactions. I think you will be faced,
no matter what you do here, with transactions in the future that
you will review and have to legislate on, just like you have done
in the past. I don’t think that whatever you do here will avoid that
kind of thing.
Mr. BECERRA. But short of providing yourself with additional
tools to try to go at this problem, you probably have to be more ag-
gressive with the tools you have in place.
Ms. PAULL. As I said in my testimony, we really think the pen-
alty regime is flawed and should be beefed up considerably. We
think disclosure would be helpful, but we ought to be realistic
about what you can get in a disclosure regime.
Mr. BECERRA. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Talisman, before we release you, as it
were, today, and Mrs. Paull also, I hope this question has not been
asked. If it has, you can briefly respond. Are you satisfied that you
and the IRS are aggressively implementing all of the powers that
the Congress has already given you in this field?
Mr. TALISMAN. Mr. Chairman, we are certainly working with the
IRS to aggressively pursue this issue with all available opportuni-
ties. I previously spoke to the issue of the 6111 registration re-
quirements, which may be the basis for your question. We were
concerned about issuing those regulations at a time when we were
seeking additional powers, given the broad standard that was
present in those regulations, a significant purpose of tax avoidance.
We also understand from the marketplace that one of the require-
ments for application of those registration requirements, conditions
of confidentiality, is basically now not a condition of these corporate
tax shelters; therefore, we do not expect by issuing the regulation
that we would get very many registrations. And so we wanted to
wait and see what the Congress—and listen to the testimony and
the comments based on the White Paper to make sure that we
were properly structuring any response in this area.
Chairman ARCHER. Well, the Congress has given you fairly broad
powers to get at this problem. If you feel that there is still a big
problem, why would you not take advantage of all of these powers
so that we could get the benefit of what the results might be before
we contemplate doing something else?
Mr. TALISMAN. I believe the Treasury Department has been very
aggressive in pursuing the corporate tax shelters of which we are
aware. And we have exercised our anti-abuse authority in appro-
priate circumstances to the extent it is applicable. For example, we
just exercised our anti abuse authority under section 643 dealing
with the son of Accelerated Charitable Remainder Trust, or so-
called Chutzpah Trust. Commissioner Rossotti has just announced
an initiative to go and pursue, again aggressively, corporate tax
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00060 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
57
shelters of which we are aware. The IRS has won a series of cases
recently that demonstrate that they were aggressively pursuing
corporate tax shelters that arose on audit, but most of those cases
arose in the early 1990s. So the effect of those cases, those trans-
actions, are largely—have largely vanished from the marketplace,
and we are onto new and different tax shelters.
So our problem is we are always playing a game of catch up.
While we can use our anti-abuse authority and our specific author-
ity to address particular shelters as they come—as we become
aware, the problem is that we are not aware of all the shelters, and
what we need to do is change the dynamics so that taxpayers apply
an appropriate cost-benefit analysis and don’t engage in artificial
tax-engineered transactions before the fact rather than after the
fact.
Chairman ARCHER. Ms. Paull, do you agree with that? Does the
joint Committee analysis show that the Treasury is effectively and
aggressively using all of the powers which have already been grant-
ed to them by the Congress?
Ms. PAULL. Well, I would have to say that we have done a sur-
vey, in essence, through conversations with the IRS and the Treas-
ury Department on what they are doing. I think that, like any-
thing, you can do more. I think enforcement ought to be a high pri-
ority within the Service. And as far as we know, that is what the
Commissioner has committed to recently.
Chairman ARCHER. But that commitment—I don’t want to read
between the lines, and I want to get this direct. If I read between
the lines, I would infer from what you said that that has not yet
been fully implemented to where we can see the effectiveness of it
and make a judgment. The commitment may be there, but has the
actual implementation to fulfill that commitment occurred so that
we have empirical data to make a judgment on how effective it is?
Ms. PAULL. Right. We have been inquiring within the IRS, and
we along with the Treasury Department hope that we are going to
get more data from them on what enforcement activities they have
been undergoing. My testimony includes some data relating to spe-
cific cases the IRS recently won. We have preliminary data on that,
and we know there are some other big transactions in the pipeline.
I think that this is just the kind of thing that there is always
going to be a time lag in trying to evaluate how effective the en-
forcement is. But I would agree with Mr. Talisman that the current
law on corporate tax shelters, both registration requirements and
the penalty regime, is not effective and needs to be worked on.
Chairman ARCHER. Okay. But the penalties are independent of
whether or not there is an abuse. Those are what would be levied
in the event that there is an abuse found. They do not set the cri-
teria for the abuse.
Ms. PAULL. That is correct. But you do have to come up with
some sort of definition of an abusive transaction that would be hit,
if you wanted to elevate and strengthen the penalty.
Chairman ARCHER. That leads me to another question for Mr.
Talisman which relates to the inquiry that he made of Mr. Doggett.
I am concerned about shifting the burden of proof onto the tax-
payers because we are trying to work away from that in tax re-
form. And where it says in the bill that every deduction or loss or
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00061 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
58
credit under the tax law will be denied unless the taxpayer can
prove that it meets whatever the tests are, which I think may be
a little vaguer than what we ought to be having in the law, that
is my own personal opinion, but to just speak to what is in the bill
denies every deduction loss or credit under the tax law unless the
taxpayer can prove that it meets the tests under the bill.
Does the Treasury think in today’s time when we are trying to
shift the burden back to the government that that is an appro-
priate way to address this problem?
Mr. TALISMAN. Mr. Chairman, in our legislation what we did was
codify what we believe is the best of the economic substance doc-
trine. And in response to comments we got with respect to our
original proposals where we said that the Secretary has authority
to deny benefits based on an application of the economic substance
doctrine, people were concerned that that would give undue discre-
tion to the Secretary’s determination. So when we issued the White
Paper, we actually removed the Secretary having authority to deny
and made it a level playing field in that with the taxpayer it would
be a court review of whether the pretax benefits were significant
relative to the tax benefits and the pretax profits are insignificant
relative to the tax benefits, and that we believe that that would put
an even balance certainly with respect to our application.
Chairman ARCHER. So let me be sure I understand your answer.
Your answer, as I understand it, is that it would not be wise to
adopt the terminology in this bill that a taxpayer could only get a
deduction loss or credit if they proved that they had met certain
tests; is that a fair analysis of your statement, that you do not
agree with that approach that is in this bill?
Mr. TALISMAN. I believe that we have to put in place appropriate
protections for legitimate business transactions, and one aspect of
that would be looking at the burden of proof issue.
Chairman ARCHER. Okay. So does that mean that you do not
agree with the approach that is in this bill?
Mr. TALISMAN. As I have commented before, I think we agree
largely with the approach in Mr. Doggett’s bill.
Chairman ARCHER. This particular aspect of the bill. I can’t ac-
cept your answer other than to also say you are not categorically
in support of this approach, you have a different approach; there-
fore ,you do not support the approach that is in this bill. Why is
it to so difficult to say that?
Mr. TALISMAN. I believe that I am comfortable with our ap-
proach.
Chairman ARCHER. You do not support the approach that is in
this bill. You believe there is another approach that would be bet-
ter?
Mr. TALISMAN. Which is our approach, yes, sir.
Chairman ARCHER. So you do not support the approach that is
in this bill. Thank you.
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. I have not yet inquired of Mr. Talisman, if I could
pick up where you left off.
Chairman ARCHER. You are recognized to inquire.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00062 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
59
With reference to the burden of proof and the provisions of HR
2255, which I know you and your staff have looked at, is it your
understanding that this bill doesn’t establish a burden of proof
independent of however the burden of proof applies in other IRS
cases?
Mr. TALISMAN. I believe that is correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. And that the criticism that the Joint Tax Com-
mittee had that has been now twisted and directed not by the
Chairman, but by a lobby group against my bill, was with reference
to the so-called super 269 provision that was going to allow an ad-
ministrative determination, which did raise a burden of proof prob-
lem?
Mr. TALISMAN. That is also correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. And with reference to the letter that you sent to
me, my colleague Mr. Hulshof dealt with this earlier, but I want
to focus attention on it because it bothered me also. You indicated
in the letter that because my bill and your earlier recommendation
was targeted toward transactions with little or no economic sub-
stance, that it did not unduly interfere with legitimate business
transactions. My objective is not to either duly or unduly interfere
with legitimate business transactions, and I wonder if you might
amplify on that sentence.
Mr. TALISMAN. It may have been a poor choice of words in my
letter, but what we were trying to articulate was that our and your
disclosure provisions might require legitimate transactions to be
disclosed. However, because what we are both doing is codifying
the existing economic substance doctrine, we don’t believe that that
aspect of the provision, of either provision, would interfere with le-
gitimate business transactions.
Mr. DOGGETT. Is it your belief that simply changing or height-
ening the penalty alone as recommended by Joint Tax will not be
sufficient to resolve this problem and keep tax hustlers from doing
what they have been doing and are doing today?
Mr. TALISMAN. I do not believe so. And, in fact, I think, as the
joint Committee has stated, the penalties are a very critical ele-
ment of this. But there are two reasons why under current law the
penalties are not being applied. One is the reasonable cause excep-
tion, which the joint Committee and others have suggested be
made stronger. The second reason is you have to first have a sub-
stantial understatement to be subject to the penalty, and if you are
not applying the economic substance doctrine up front, you may not
believe you have a substantial understatement and therefore may
not believe you are subject to penalty.
Mr. DOGGETT. Is it also your belief that with reference to the ad-
ministrative authority that you currently have, that whether you
are talking about that which you have already utilized, as you have
described it today, or that which you have not yet utilized because
of one reason or another, that the existing administrative authority
is not sufficiently broad to resolve promptly this problem of abusive
corporate tax shelters?
Mr. TALISMAN. We would not be before the Committee today if
we did not believe that.
Mr. DOGGETT. Lastly I have used terms in my testimony here
and on other occasions such as tax cheat, hustler, sleazy, back
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00063 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
60
door, black box, underhanded. What I want to ask you is in your
experience at the Department, have you seen transactions that you
think that those words are fairly applied to with reference to abu-
sive corporate tax shelters?
Mr. TALISMAN. I believe there are artificial abusive tax-engi-
neered transactions that we see at our Department.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ARCHER. Are there any other questions for this panel?
If not, thank you very much.
Our next panel is Mr. Paul Sax, who is the chairman of the Sec-
tion of Taxation, American Bar Association; David Lifson, Amer-
ican Institute of Certified Public Accountants; Charles Shewbridge,
chief tax executive for BellSouth; and Harold Handler, chair of the
New York State Bar Association. If you gentlemen would come to
the witness table we will be prepared to receive your testimony.
Welcome. Mr. Sax, would you lead off? And if each of you at the
beginning of your testimony would identify yourselves and whom
you represent for the record, you may proceed.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Sax.
STATEMENT OF PAUL J. SAX, CHAIR, SECTION OF TAXATION,
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION, AND PARTNER, ORRICK,
HERRINGTON & SUTCLIFFE, SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA
Mr. SAX. Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman ARCHER. As usual, without objection, your entire writ-
ten statement will be inserted in the record, and we would encour-
age you to summarize in your verbal statement.
Mr. SAX. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee.
My name is Paul Sax. I am a partner in the law firm of Orrick,
Harrington and Sutcliffe in San Francisco and currently serve as
chair of the Section of Taxation of the American Bar Association.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. Last spring my
predecessor Stefan Tucker presented testimony before this Commit-
tee’s Subcommittee on Oversight and the Senate Finance Com-
mittee on corporate tax shelters. My testimony today is consistent.
Our message is the same. The Tax Section views itself as counsel
to the tax system, and this generation of corporate tax shelters se-
riously threatens that system.
Certainly revenue loss is a major issue, but perhaps more impor-
tant is the potential for lost confidence in the tax system. We be-
lieve that if you do not act now, when the taxpaying citizenry
learns what large corporations were allowed to do, it will be por-
trayed as a corporate raid on the Treasury, and that will have a
seriously detrimental effect on the willingness of individuals to pay
their taxes.
The reason this large corporate shelter activity is so threatening
is that the promoters are selling a new product. That product is
well-calculated defiance of the tax collector. The promoters explain
that the chance of audit detection and successful challenge is min-
uscule; the penalties are small and usually avoidable. The resulting
arithmetic of the odds favoring a multimillion-dollar tax saving is
simply compelling. Whether the deal would withstand scrutiny is
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00064 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
61
1The Section of Taxation has testified regarding corporate tax shelters on two prior occasions
this year. On March 10, 1999, the Section testified before the Subcommittee on Oversight, and
on April 27, 1999, the Section testified before the Senate Finance Committee. Our testimony
today is consistent with this prior testimony.
not relevant. Recent judicial decisions do not materially change
these odds. The game has become catch me if you can.
Why have we heard so little about this? A veil of what-is-the-
problem nonchalance is a very sophisticated defense. The press are
frustrated by claims of confidentiality. This activity is too new to
be seen in tax return data. The fall-off in corporate tax revenue
quite possibly could have any number of explanations, and the
usual defenders of the tax system, the big five and some large law
firms, are among the principal promoters. This year end season is
worth millions, even billions, to them.
Lawyers have been a part of that problem. We have now ad-
dressed that. Less than 2 weeks ago we proposed regulations under
Circular 230 that would outlaw the practice of giving penalty pro-
tection tax opinions based on hypothetical or false facts. A copy of
that submission is attached to our testimony. We submit to you
today our legislative proposal. The key to our proposal is disclo-
sure.
Large tax shelters, we use 10 million, must disclose the facts and
the basis for their tax saving. Failure to disclose would be backed
by a new penalty based solely on failure to disclose. Because the
only consequence to legitimate transactions would be disclosure,
the effect to legitimate business would be minimal. After all, there
is no right to hide facts from the tax collector. A key provision
would elevate the visibility within the company, requiring the chief
financial officer to attest to the facts. This would preclude the prac-
tice of circumventing the tax director who signs the tax return. The
existing understatement penalty would be extended to the aider
and abettor circle, the promoters, tax and different parties and the
tax professionals. Last, the economic substance test now applied by
the courts would be codified so that promoters could not contrive
ambiguity in the sales effort. Nontax benefits would have to be sub-
stantial relative to tax benefits.
Mr. Chairman, if you do this, we believe the current threat to the
tax system will be averted. If you do not, we fear the reaction of
individual taxpayers when they later learn what was allowed to
happen.
Thank you again. That concludes my remarks. As counsel to the
tax system, we would be pleased to help. Do not hesitate to call
upon us. I would be pleased to respond to your questions.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you, Mr. Sax.
[The prepared statement and attachment follow:]
Statement of Paul J. Sax, Chair, Section of Taxation, American Bar Associa-
tion and Partner, Orrick, Herrington, Sutcliffe, San Francisco, California
My name is Paul J. Sax. I appear before you today in my capacity as Chair of
the American Bar Association Section of Taxation. This testimony is presented on
behalf of the Section of Taxation. It has not been approved by the House of Dele-
gates or the Board of Governors of the American Bar Association and, accordingly,
should not be construed as representing the policy of the Association.
The Section of Taxation appreciates the opportunity to appear before the Com-
mittee today to discuss the very important subject of corporate tax shelters.1 Our
testimony will use the term ‘‘corporate tax shelters’’ in discussing the very aggres-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00065 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
62
2We also refer to these shelters as ‘‘transactions,’’ although recognizing that the taxpayer’s
investment in a financial or other tax shelter product, or other taxpayer action, may not fit the
traditional description of a transaction. We believe all such actions need to be addressed by any
legislation.
sive tax transactions currently being marketed.2 However, the Committee should
understand that this phenomenon is not limited to large, multinational corporate
taxpayers; indeed, it is not limited to corporations. Increasingly, tax shelter products
are also being marketed to unincorporated business taxpayers, including middle
market businesses, and wealthy individuals.
My testimony today contains three parts: (1) a brief reference to Circular 230, (2)
a description of the Tax Section’s corporate tax shelter legislative recommendations,
and (3) an amplification of certain aspects of our legislative recommendations. But
first, I want to say something about the corporate tax shelter problem.
The Corporate Tax Shelter Problem
We are aware that you may be told that there is no corporate tax shelter problem
and that Congress does not need to take any action. Mr. Chairman, make no mis-
take about it. There is a serious problem, and it needs to be dealt with if we are
to maintain any semblance of public confidence in the tax system. In the 1970’s and
early 1980’s, when individual tax shelters were in vogue, the vast majority of Amer-
ican people justifiably became outraged when they learned through the press that
certain high-income taxpayers were eliminating or substantially reducing their tax
liabilities by means of uneconomic and frequently artificial transactions.
Today, transactions that have little or no economic substance, that are designed
solely to defer or permanently eliminate tax liability, and that are premised on opin-
ions that recite very questionable facts are being marketed to businesses of all sizes
and to wealthy individuals. These transactions are not based on Congressionally
mandated tax incentives, such as the low-income housing credit, but instead apply
aggressive interpretations of the law in situations where the transactions would be
dismissed out of hand by the taxpayers if it were not for the tax avoidance benefits
of the transactions.
We are not in a position to estimate the impact on Federal revenues of the cor-
porate tax shelter activity of the past several years. However, our experience as tax
practitioners suggests that the level of tax shelter activity is very substantial. Many
of the shelter transactions involve purported tax savings of tens of millions of dol-
lars. As these transactions spread in the economy to smaller businesses and indi-
vidual taxpayers, the level of activity will continue to grow. Should Congress fail
to take appropriate legislative action, taxpayers and their advisors will be
emboldened and become even more aggressive. At some point, after the inevitable
publicity, the American people may justifiably ask their elected representatives why
action was not taken to stop this tax avoidance activity when the abuses were
brought to the Congress’ attention.
Circular 230
I would like to refer to what I believe is a very important recent action by the
Tax Section in proposing amendments to Circular 230, the rules promulgated by the
Treasury Department that seek to regulate the conduct of practitioners who rep-
resent taxpayers before the Internal Revenue Service. Less than two weeks ago, on
October 29, the Tax Section transmitted to the Treasury Department and the Inter-
nal Revenue Service proposed amendments to Circular 230 intended to impose a
higher standard of conduct on lawyers and other practitioners who render certain
opinions in connection with corporate tax shelters. Copies of our recommendations
were sent to you, Mr. Chairman, to Mr. Rangel, and to the appropriate tax staffs,
and a copy of our recommendations is attached to this statement.
Our recent action, recommending amendments to Circular 230, reflects a long-
standing view of the Tax Section that the professions, including the legal profession,
must do what they reasonably can to assure appropriate conduct of their members.
We are confident that if the Treasury Department adopts our recommended changes
to Circular 230, we will see a higher standard of conduct by all tax practitioners
who render corporate tax shelter opinions affected by the recommended amend-
ments.
Legislative Recommendations
Although we consider the revision of Circular 230 to be an important step in ad-
dressing the corporate tax shelter problem, it is not the only step. In addition, the
Internal Revenue Service must audit these transactions and make clear to tax-
payers, tax practitioners, and marketing organizations that it is prepared to assert
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00066 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
63
both civil and criminal penalties where appropriate. We are pleased that Deputy
Treasury Secretary Eizenstat and Commissioner Rossotti recently have stated pub-
licly their concern with corporate tax shelters and their intention to take appro-
priate actions to curb this potentially harmful activity.
But, Mr. Chairman, there is a limit on what the Internal Revenue Service can
do. Under the best of circumstances, it cannot detect all questionable transactions,
it cannot devote audit resources to challenge all transactions it does detect, and it
cannot litigate all of the cases that should be litigated. If the marketing of aggres-
sive tax shelter transactions is to be constrained, it is vitally important to put added
pressure on the marketing process.
The marketing of these transactions is predicated on the odds favoring success.
Promoters understand that the IRS is unlikely to detect and challenge more than
a small fraction of transactions. They also view applicable penalties as relatively
minor and usually avoidable. They put these factors together to make a compelling
case that the transaction makes economic sense, even though the transaction would
not withstand judicial scrutiny. Corporate tax managers often believe that they have
nothing to lose by entering into an aggressive tax shelter. Even if the claimed bene-
fits are disallowed, they believe that they will be able to settle out the penalties and
will be no worse off than they would have been if they had not entered into the
transaction.
Our legislative recommendations are intended to accomplish four objectives. First,
to encourage the private sector—taxpayers, tax advisors, and those who market cor-
porate tax shelters—to carefully scrutinize the facts and the legal analysis of pro-
posed transactions and consider carefully the appropriateness of the transactions
under the law. Second, to level the audit playing field by assuring that the largest
and most aggressive of these transactions are disclosed to the Internal Revenue
Service on the tax return. Third, to make it clear to the Internal Revenue Service
that Congress places emphasis on the audit of and challenge to questionable trans-
actions. Fourth, to legislatively endorse a reasonable interpretation of the economic
substance doctrine—an interpretation that we believe constitutes present law. We
think these four objectives may be furthered by the following legislative actions.
1. Require specific, clear reporting for a ‘‘large tax shelter.’’
We recommend the enactment of a new Section 6115 of the Internal Revenue
Code that would require the following tax return disclosure for a ‘‘large tax shelter,’’
as defined.
a) A detailed description of the facts, assumptions of facts and factual con-
clusions (including conclusions regarding the business or economic purposes
or objectives of the transaction) that are relied upon to support the manner
in which the transaction is reported on the tax return;
b) A description of the due diligence performed to ascertain the accuracy
of such facts, assumptions and factual conclusions;
c) A statement signed under penalties of perjury by the taxpayer’s chief fi-
nancial officer or comparable senior corporate officer with a detailed knowl-
edge of the business or economic purposes or objectives of the transaction
that the facts are true and correct as of the date the return is filed, to the
best of such person’s knowledge and belief. If the actual facts varied materi-
ally from the facts, assumptions or factual conclusions relied upon, the
statement would need to describe such variances;
d) Copies of any written material provided in connection with the offer of
the tax shelter to the taxpayer by a third party;
e) A full description of any express or implied agreement or arrangement
with any advisor, or with any offeror, that the fee payable to such person
would be contingent or subject to possible reimbursement if the anticipated
tax benefits are not obtained; and
f) A full description of any express or implied warranty from any person
with respect to the anticipated tax results from the tax shelter.
In the event a taxpayer fails to satisfy the Section 6115 disclosure requirements
for a ‘‘large tax shelter,’’ a new Section 6716 would impose a $50,000 penalty. If the
nondisclosure were determined to be willful, criminal penalties also would apply.
The penalty should be a no-fault penalty relating solely to the failure to disclose in-
formation on the tax return. Neither the amount of the new Section 6716 penalty
nor its applicability should be dependent on whether or not the transaction in issue
results in a tax deficiency. Moreover, the nondisclosure penalty would be totally un-
related to any penalty to which the taxpayer might be subject under Section 6662.
We believe the proposed Section 6716 penalty should be subject to a reasonable
cause exception permitting abatement of the penalty if the taxpayer establishes that
it exercised due diligence in attempting to accurately report the relevant informa-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00067 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
64
tion (e.g., that it had appropriate fact-gathering procedures in place and that it did
its best to follow them).
2. Broaden the substantial understatement penalty to cover outside advisors, pro-
moters and ‘‘tax indifferent parties.’’
In any situation in which the substantial understatement penalty of existing law
is imposed on the taxpayer, a penalty also should be imposed on any outside advi-
sors who rendered favorable tax advice or opinions used in the promotion of the tax
shelter, and promoters who actively participated in the sale, planning or implemen-
tation of the tax shelter. The same type of penalty should also be imposed on any
‘‘tax indifferent party,’’ unless any such party can establish that it had no reason
to believe the transaction was a tax shelter with respect to the taxpayer. The pen-
alty should not be imposed on advisers who rendered opinions that comply with our
proposed Circular 230 amendments.
Such penalties should be set at levels commensurate with the fees or benefits
such parties stood to realize if the transaction were successful. In addition, separate
procedural rules should be provided to assure such parties of due process, similar
to the rules applicable in the case of penalties on tax return preparers.
3. Define ‘‘large tax shelter’’ for purposes of proposed disclosure requirement.
The definition of ‘‘tax shelter’’ presently contained in section 6662(d)(2)(C)(iii)
should be retained. The term ‘‘large tax shelter’’ would be defined as any tax shelter
involving more than $10 million of tax benefits in which the potential business or
economic benefit is immaterial or insignificant in relation to the tax benefit that
might result to the taxpayer from entering into the transaction. In addition, if any
element of a tax shelter that could be implemented separately would itself be a
‘‘large tax shelter’’ if it were implemented as a stand-alone event, the entire trans-
action would constitute a ‘‘large tax shelter.’’
4. Clarify that, where the economic substance doctrine applies, the non-tax consid-
erations must be substantial in relation to the potential tax benefits.
Most courts, as well as careful tax advisors, apply the economic substance doc-
trine by weighing the potential tax and non-tax results of a contemplated trans-
action. We think this is entirely consistent with long-standing congressional intent.
Codification of this rule would provide a clear statement of the standard generally
applied by courts under the economic substance doctrine, and would prevent reli-
ance on unclear or conflicting judicial articulations of that standard in rendering
opinions on tax-driven transactions. Any such codification would not, however, dis-
place current law where the business purpose test is currently applied without a
weighing of the tax and business objectives, such as the business purpose rules ap-
plied in the context of section 355 and in most tax-free corporate acquisitions.
5. Articulate a clear Congressional policy that existing enforcement tools should be
utilized to stop the proliferation of large tax shelters.
Congress should make clear its view that examination of large tax shelter trans-
actions by the Internal Revenue Service should be considered a tax administration
priority. This should include the application of both civil and criminal penalties
when appropriate.
Amplification of Certain Legislative Recommendations
RETURN DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENT
a) Rationale.
We seek to achieve two objectives in proposing enactment of a ‘‘large tax shelter’’
return disclosure requirement. The first objective is to reduce the incentive to en-
gage in transactions that would not withstand scrutiny on the ground that the like-
lihood of detection is small. Many tax shelter products and transactions are com-
prised of purportedly separate transactions or steps, often intended to obscure the
overall transaction and frequently involving steps both within and outside the
United States. As such, these transactions are extremely complex and often impos-
sible to detect through information contained in a tax return, even by an experi-
enced revenue agent. We believe Congress should mandate specific tax return disclo-
sure obligations that will lessen the significant role that the likelihood of escaping
detection currently plays in the corporate tax shelter equation. On the assumption
that a return disclosure system is designed to be compliance friendly, as we believe
it can, the argument that legitimate transactions may be affected should be consid-
ered with a healthy dose of skepticism. Whether legitimate in the eyes of the tax-
payer or not, we would ask what is inappropriate about fair disclosure in a tax re-
turn context, even if the transaction is legitimate?
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00068 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
65
3Some businesses that will be subject to the reporting requirement may not have an employee
denominated as the chief financial officer. Moreover, if the business is unincorporated, it may
have no officers at all. Thus, it will be important for the legislation, or the legislative history,
to make it clear that in such circumstances the certification must be executed by the person
with responsibilities comparable to those of a chief financial officer.
The second objective of the proposed return disclosure requirement is to encourage
taxpayers and their advisors to pay careful attention to the actual facts underlying
the proposed transaction prior to its consummation. We remain concerned, as we
have previously testified, that often the facts assumed in analyzing the tax shelter
are not the facts that actually occur. We believe the return disclosure requirement
will underscore the importance of the actual facts of the transaction and encourage
the taxpayer and its advisors to more carefully scrutinize the transaction in ad-
vance.
b) Certification by the chief financial or other senior officer.
We believe the proposed chief financial officer certification is an extremely impor-
tant component of the return disclosure requirement for two reasons. First, the chief
financial officer, because of his or her position in the company, can be certain that
the business people within the organization who likely were involved in imple-
menting the transaction, and, thus, who likely are most familiar with the actual
facts, will be involved in preparation of the certification.3 It will be in the direct in-
terest of the chief financial officer to assure such involvement, and there will be
much less risk that the taxpayer’s return preparation personnel are isolated from
the actual facts.
Second, because these transactions by definition are large (we suggest a $10 mil-
lion reporting threshold) and because they are very aggressive, we think it is appro-
priate to encourage the taxpayer’s senior management to personally consider the
proposed transaction. If the chief financial officer knows that he or she will be re-
quired to execute the certification, we expect the officer will be much more inter-
ested in being personally advised of the transaction and of its risks before it is con-
summated.
Because of the potentially serious civil and criminal penalties that could result
to a corporate officer who commits perjury by executing an inaccurate certificate,
the legislation should provide appropriate separate administrative and judicial pro-
cedures that will accord the officer full due process. To this end, procedures should
be established for reviewing officer certification issues that are independent of the
audit process.
Mr. Chairman, the Tax Section attaches particular importance to the proposed
large tax shelter return disclosure requirement because we believe it has the poten-
tial to accomplish two important objectives: (1) reduce the incentive to hide the ball
from the IRS and (2) encourage a more careful factual and legal analysis of the
transaction on the front end, before the transaction is consummated. If the disclo-
sure requirement has this effect in even a fraction of the corporate tax shelter
schemes currently on the market, it will make a significant contribution to tax ad-
ministration and the American people’s confidence in the tax system.
AFFIRMATION OF ECONOMIC SUBSTANCE STANDARD
We are aware that certain advisors take the position that any amount, even a de
minimis amount, of risk, profit or other economic return is sufficient to satisfy the
judicial economic substance doctrine. While we believe this view does not reflect
present law, it is important to foreclose such assertions. It is for this reason that
we make the relatively modest suggestion that Congress legislatively affirm that
when a court determines the economic substance doctrine applies, the taxpayer
must establish that the non-tax considerations in the transaction were substantial
in relation to the potential tax benefits.
Our recommendation does not require the Congress to adopt a definition of eco-
nomic substance or specify the particular circumstances in which the doctrine is rel-
evant. We think both of these matters are best left to the courts where judicial dis-
cretion can be applied on a case-by-case basis. However, we think it is appropriate
and important for the Congress to affirm what we believe to be current law, namely,
that the non-tax considerations in the transaction must be substantial in relation
to the potential tax benefits. It would also be helpful if Congress would make it
clear that in evaluating the non-tax aspects of a transaction, such as potential eco-
nomic profit, all of the costs associated with the transaction, including fees paid to
promoters and advisors, should be taken into account.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00069 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
66
4The substance and purpose requirement comprehends appropriate consideration of the judi-
cial doctrines of substance versus form, economic substance, and business purpose on a general-
ized basis, without implying that any of these doctrines is exclusive of the others or more rel-
evant than the others for opinion purposes.
CONCLUSION
One of the arguments that we expect the Committee will continue to hear from
opponents of corporate tax shelter legislation is that the Internal Revenue Service
already has the tools to deal with corporate tax shelters on its own, without legisla-
tion. For example, the Committee may be told that recent court decisions in the
Commissioner’s favor prove this point. We urge the Committee not to fall for this
assertion. In spite of these recent decisions, we have observed no slowdown in the
sales of tax shelter products; indeed, as we have indicated, we see a broadening of
the market to smaller businesses and wealthy individuals. In addition, it is impos-
sible to expect the Internal Revenue Service, even under the best of circumstances,
to audit, let alone litigate, all of these transactions. Ours is a self-assessment sys-
tem. It works best when taxpayers are motivated to take their return reporting obli-
gations seriously. We think the only reasonable way to meaningfully impact the cur-
rent corporate tax shelter phenomenon is to seek to modify the behavior of tax-
payers, their tax advisors and those involved in the marketing of tax shelters
through an improved self-policing system. Changes to Circular 230 will help. In-
creased audit activity by the Internal Revenue Service is very important. But, Con-
gress also has a responsibility. We urge the Committee to take the lead by adopting
legislation along the lines we recommend. As you proceed in your deliberations,
please know that members of the Tax Section are prepared to lend a helping hand.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee
today. I will be pleased to respond to any questions.
Section of Taxation Report to Amend 31 C.F.R. Part 10, Treasury Depart-
ment Circular 230, to Deal With ‘‘More Likely Than Not’’ Opinions Relat-
ing to Tax Shelter Items of Corporations
This Report with proposed amendments to Circular 230 has not been approved
by the House of Delegates or the Board of Governors of the American Bar Associa-
tion and, accordingly, should not be construed as representing the position of the
Association.
REPORT
Treasury Department Circular 230, set forth at 31 C.F.R. part 10, provides rules
for persons who practice before the Internal Revenue Service. Section 10.33 of Cir-
cular 230 deals with tax shelter opinions that are designed to be included or de-
scribed in tax shelter offering materials that are publicly distributed. The rules in
section 10.33 do not apply specifically to practitioners who provide ‘‘more likely than
not’’ opinions to corporate taxpayers directly for possible use as legal justification
in the event of an accuracy-related penalty assertion with respect to a ‘‘tax shelter
item’’ as that term is defined in Treas. Reg. §1.6662–4(g)(3). We recommend the ad-
dition of a new section 10.35 to fill this gap. The text of the proposed amendment
to Circular 230 is attached.
New section 10.35 would provide minimum standards for practitioners who are
asked to furnish their corporate clients with ‘‘more likely than not’’ opinions under
section 6664(c) and Treas. Reg. §1.6664–4(e) for the purpose of establishing the rea-
sonable cause and good faith defense to an accuracy-related penalty by providing
legal justification for the tax treatment of a tax shelter item. Because the possible
application of section 6664 necessarily arises in audit proceedings before the IRS,
Circular 230 should provide rules of practice with respect to such ‘‘more likely than
not’’ opinions.
New section 10.35 provides that a practitioner providing a more likely than not
opinion to establish a taxpayer’s legal justification for the tax treatment of a cor-
porate tax shelter item is required to evaluate and take account of all relevant facts;
to relate the applicable law to those facts; to consider, to the extent relevant and
appropriate, both the substance and the purpose of the plan or arrangement;4 to
identify and discuss all material tax issues; to identify and discuss the relevance
and persuasiveness of the legal authority pertinent to the facts and material tax
issues; and to contain a reasoned analysis of whether applicable authority supports
the position taken by the taxpayer. The opinion must conclude unambiguously that
there is a greater than 50-percent likelihood that the tax treatment of the tax shel-
ter item would be upheld if challenged by the IRS.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00070 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
67
The opinion must not be based on any unreasonable factual or legal assumptions.
Assuming, rather than determining through reasonable inquiry, that a material fact
exists would be considered unreasonable. Assuming, rather than analyzing and con-
cluding, that a material legal issue would be resolved favorably would also be con-
sidered unreasonable. By way of example, it would be unreasonable for a practi-
tioner merely to assume the existence of a business purpose for a transaction if
business purpose is a material fact. It would also be unreasonable for a practitioner
who establishes the existence of a business purpose to assume, rather than to ana-
lyze and conclude, that such a business purpose supports the transaction in ques-
tion.
Except as provided below, a practitioner providing an opinion described in new
section 10.35 must be knowledgeable in the relevant aspects of the Federal tax law
at the time the opinion is rendered. The practitioner may not rely on an analysis
of the Federal tax law prepared by another person with respect to any aspect of the
taxpayer’s treatment of the same tax shelter item, unless the practitioner is not suf-
ficiently knowledgeable to render an informed opinion on a particular aspect of the
Federal tax law. In such a case, the practitioner may rely on an analysis prepared
by another practitioner who is knowledgeable with respect to that particular aspect
of the law. For example, a practitioner giving advice as to the effect of a transaction
in which the taxpayer will purchase an interest in a securitization trust holding a
municipal bond may rely on the opinion of bond counsel that interest on the bond
is exempt from Federal income tax under section 103.
A more likely than not opinion provided with respect to a corporate tax shelter
item that does not state that it is being provided as legal justification for the treat-
ment of such item on a tax return shall be presumed not to have been intended for
such purpose. The Section of Taxation recommends that the Treasury Department
consider the addition of a similar presumption to the regulations under §6664.
This recommendation is made in a policy environment of increased attention to
corporate tax shelter activities. See Treasury Department, White Paper, The Prob-
lem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion, Analysis, Legislative Proposals, released
July 1, 1999; Joint Committee on Taxation, Staff Penalty and Interest Study, re-
leased July 22, 1999. The Section believes there is a consensus among practitioners
that the practice of giving more likely than not opinions that are intended to provide
legal justification for the tax treatment of corporate tax shelter items should be ad-
dressed as a matter of proper practice as a supplement to continuing reform of un-
derlying substantive law. See, e.g., James P. Holden, 1999 Griswold Lecture before
the American College of Tax Counsel, Dealing with the Aggressive Corporate Tax
Shelter Problem, 52 Tax Lawyer 369 (1999), making many points similar to this re-
port and a recommendation from which the proposed amendment draws heavily.
The Section recommends the amendment of Circular 230 by adoption of the fol-
lowing amendments:
DRAFT OF PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO CIRCULAR 230
Add a new §10.35 to read as follows:
§10.35. ‘‘More likely than not’’ opinions.— (a) Application of section This sec-
tion prescribes minimum standards for a practitioner who provides a ‘‘more likely
than not’’ opinion for the stated purpose of establishing the legal justification of a
corporate taxpayer under 26 C.F.R. 1.6664–4(e)(2) for the tax treatment of a ‘‘tax
shelter item,’’ as defined in 26 C.F.R. 1.6662–4(g)(3). This section also necessarily
applies to opinions prepared for such a purpose that express a higher level of con-
fidence than ‘‘more likely than not.’’
(b) Requirements for ‘‘more likely than not’’ opinion. A practitioner who provides
an opinion to a corporate client for the stated purpose of establishing that, at the
time a return is filed, the client reasonably believed that the tax treatment of a tax
shelter item as reflected on the client’s return was more likely than not the proper
treatment, must, as of the time the opinion is rendered and subject to paragraph
(b)(9), be knowledgeable in the relevant aspects of Federal tax law and must comply
in good faith with each of the following requirements:
(1) Evaluate all relevant facts. The practitioner must make inquiry as to all
relevant facts and circumstances and be satisfied that the opinion takes ac-
count of all such facts and circumstances. The opinion should not be based,
directly or indirectly, on any unreasonable factual assumptions (e.g., an as-
sumption of a fact that is material to the analysis, such as an assumption
that the transaction had a business purpose or an assumption with respect
to the profitability of the transaction apart from tax benefits, or an assump-
tion of a fact made by a valuation expert in connection with an appraisal).
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00071 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
68
(2) Reliance on representations. The practitioner may, where the cir-
cumstances indicate that it would be reasonable to do so taking into ac-
count the practitioner’s prior experience with the client, rely upon factual
representations by persons that the practitioner considers to be responsible
and knowledgeable. If the information so represented appears to be incor-
rect, incomplete or inconsistent in any material respect, the practitioner
must make further inquiry.
(3) Relate law to facts. The opinion must relate the applicable law to the
relevant facts.
(4) Consider substance and purpose. The opinion must take into account, to
the extent relevant and appropriate under applicable law, both the sub-
stance and the purpose of the entity, plan or arrangement that gives rise
to the tax shelter item in question.
(5) Identify all material tax issues. The opinion must identify and discuss
all material tax issues unless the opinion is provided solely with respect to
a specific tax issue, as described by paragraph (b)(9).
(6) Evaluate authorities. The opinion must identify and discuss the rel-
evance and persuasiveness of the legal authority pertinent to the facts and
material tax issues.
(7) Analysis. The opinion must contain a reasoned analysis of whether ap-
plicable authority supports the position taken by the taxpayer. Such anal-
ysis shall be made in the manner described in 26 C.F.R. 1.6662–4(d)(3). The
opinion must not assume the favorable resolution of any legal issue mate-
rial to the analysis.
(8) More likely than not assessment. The opinion must unambiguously con-
clude that there is a greater than 50-percent likelihood that the tax treat-
ment of the item would be upheld on the merits if challenged.
(9) Reliance on analysis of others. A more likely than not opinion may not
rely on an analysis of the Federal tax law prepared by another person that
relates directly or indirectly to any aspect of the taxpayer’s treatment of the
same tax shelter item, unless such analysis is limited to a specific tax issue
(e.g., whether interest on a municipal bond is exempt from Federal income
tax under section 103) with respect to which the practitioner is not suffi-
ciently knowledgeable to render an informed opinion. In such a case, the
practitioner may rely on the analysis of another practitioner who is suffi-
ciently knowledgeable regarding such issue, but the practitioner must en-
sure that the combined analysis, taken as a whole, satisfies the require-
ments of this section.
(c) Presumption. A more likely than not opinion provided with respect to a cor-
porate tax shelter item that does not state that it is for the purpose of providing
the taxpayer with legal justification for the treatment of such item on a tax return
shall be presumed not to have been intended for such purpose.
(d) Effect of opinion that meets these standards. An opinion of a practitioner that
meets the above requirements will satisfy the practitioner’s responsibilities under this
section. The persuasiveness of the opinion with regard to the tax issues in question
and the taxpayer’s good faith reliance on the opinion will be separately determined
under applicable provisions of the law and regulations.
Amend §10.52(b) as follows:
A practitioner may be disbarred or suspended from practice before the Internal
Revenue Service for any of the following: * * *
(b) Recklessly or through gross incompetence (within the meaning of §10.51(j))
violating §10.33, §10.34 or §10.35of this part.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Lifson.
STATEMENT OF DAVID A. LIFSON, CHAIR, TAX EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE, AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF CERTIFIED PUBLIC
ACCOUNTANTS
Mr. LIFSON. Thank you, Chairman Archer. My name is David
Lifson, and I am the chair of the Tax Executive Committee of the
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00072 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
69
Corporate tax sheltering is posing a problem for the tax system,
and one we stand ready to help you address. While you are sure
on the right track here, I just hope you get on the right train. We
strongly oppose the undermining of our tax system by complex,
convoluted and confusing tax sophistry. Clearly there are abuses,
and they must be dealt with efficiently.
We also strongly believe that taxpayers should be entitled to
structure transactions to take advantage of intended incentives and
to pay no more tax than is required by the law. Clearly the dif-
ficulty comes in when trying to draw a delicate balance in deter-
mining when the character of tax planning transactions morphs
from legitimate to abusive.
The system is currently responding, but perhaps not fast enough
for you as legislators. Recent court cases are evidence for this ob-
servation. The IRS is clearly responding, too, with their announce-
ment of a new operational unit, and they will be even more effec-
tive in the future with the changes made by you through the re-
structuring act.
Because of the lack of consensus on the correct approach to legis-
lation, we strongly urge a careful examination of the conflicting,
often confusing proposals you are considering. After all, no one
likes seeing the tax system gamed. No one likes feeling that some
taxpayers are not paying their fair share. On the other hand, when
you develop complex rules in highly technical areas that could af-
fect Main Street, the yellow caution flag needs to be waved. I can
foresee many businesses having to do uneconomic transactional
analysis on normal business acquisitions to assure the government
they are not subject to this special regime that is proposed by
some.
This result would serve no one well. We urge continued focus on
the objectives stated by the Chair in announcing these hearings, to
quote you, Chairman Archer, to stop abuses while properly re-
straining new blanket authorities for the IRS that might chill le-
gitimate business transactions. To this end we encourage the use
of exceptions for transactions that have a business purpose or are
consistent with the legislative intent of the law. None of the pro-
posals before you contain such exceptions. If the government wants
to place a greater responsibility on large gray-area transactions, it
should enact clear rules to provide for enhanced disclosures, high
standards for legal support, and higher penalties on failures in cer-
tain defined situations.
Call these reportable transactions, something a responsible cor-
porate officer will freely disclose or decide not to engage in; not tax
shelters that imply guilt. Encourage compliance, not disrespect for
the system. Voluntary compliance is the cornerstone of our system.
Use it. Use the de minimis exception; exempt smaller transactious,
say, those involving less than 10 million in tax or 1 million in advi-
sory fees, as the ABA has suggested.
We support a more effective disclosure regime both in advance
and with return filings. We support higher penalties on reportable
transactions that are not disclosed. We support a penalty regime
that provides incentives for disclosure, the use of objective indica-
tors to identify transactions the government wants to scrutinize,
and evidence of due diligence by corporate officials in signing the
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00073 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
70
return disclosure, as well as high standards for tax opinion letters
that apply to all tax shelter opinions. And we support effective pen-
alties on third parties, some of whom are not currently subject to
the rules of Circular 230.
We are very concerned about and cannot support a super 269 ap-
proach, a disclosure regime that requires the taxpayer and numer-
ous third parties to disclose at the time a transaction is offered, or,
in particular, a disclosure requirement that requires a 75 percent
likelihood standard in the penalty regime.
In conclusion, we stand ready to continue our work in this area,
to meet with your staffs to discuss and refine our proposals, and
to try to improve the system to benefit the American people. Thank
you for your consideration.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you, Mr. Lifson.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of David A. Lifson, Chair, American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants
My name is David Lifson, and I chair the Tax Executive Committee of the Amer-
ican Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). The AICPA is the national
professional association for CPAs, and our more than 330,000 members are from
firms of all sizes, and from business, education, and government. Our members
work regularly with the tax laws that you write, and we have a strong interest in
making the tax law fair, simple, and administrable.
I am pleased to present our testimony on ‘‘corporate tax shelters.’’ For the last
year, we have had a task force working hard on the issues that the Treasury and
Joint Tax Committee staff studies have attempted to address. We have discussed
the issues with our leadership and membership; we have met with representatives
of the American Bar Association Tax Section and Tax Executives Institute to iden-
tify areas of consensus; and we have met with Treasury Department and Congres-
sional staff. While we have made progress, there are still significant areas of dif-
ference and a lack of consensus on key issues. We are all concerned about the mis-
use of our tax system, but we are also concerned that legislation to curtail this ac-
tivity not be so overly broad, vague, and punitive as to have a chilling effect on nor-
mal transactions of average business taxpayers. We urge restraint in legislating so-
lutions until discussions can build a greater consensus on the best approach to the
difficult and complex problem of narrowly but effectively targeting abusive corporate
transactions, while leaving intact a taxpayer’s ability to plan regular commercial
transactions without fear of draconian sanctions.
In addressing corporate tax shelters legislatively, we encourage you to keep in
mind that the system must work efficiently, so that taxpayers and practitioners can
understand and the IRS can enforce the rules. The tax system works through com-
pliance and enforcement, based on the broad powers that Congress has already
given the IRS to curb abuses. Not every perceived abuse requires new legislation
with its concomitant new regulations and rulings. Indeed, the government has pre-
vailed in several very recent tax cases based on present law (Compaq Computer
Corp., 113 TC No. 17 (September 21, 1999); IES Industries, Inc. v. U.S., No. C97–
206 (N.D. Iowa Sept. 22, 1999); Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc., 113 TC No. 21 (October 19,
1999); and Saba Partnership, Brunswick Corporation, Tax Matters Partner, TC
Memo 1999–359 (October 27, 1999)), following last year’s decisions in ACM Partner-
ship v. Commissioner (157 F2d 231 (3d Cir. 1998, affg. in part T.C. Memo. 1997–
115)) and ASA Investerings Partnership (1998–305 TCM).
We are also pleased with the recent announcement by the IRS that it is forming
an operational group to target corporate tax shelter transactions. As we have stated
in prior testimony on this subject, some of the problem is lack of enforcement of ex-
isting rules rather than the need for new rules. As the government becomes more
successful in identifying and prosecuting tax shelter cases, taxpayers and shelter
promoters will be curtailed from abusive transactions. Nevertheless, we do support
efforts to raise the standards required of ‘‘more likely than not opinions’’ through
changes to Circular 230, and believe the practices of those not currently subject to
Circular 230 must be subject to meaningful penalties as well.
We specifically reject the imposition of a new ‘‘super 269’’ approach that is in-
cluded in some proposals. Such a new regime would be imposed over and above cur-
rent law requirements and would deny deductions, losses, or credits unless a com-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00074 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
71
plex analysis demonstrates an appropriate level of pre-tax profit. This approach,
combined with a presumption of non-economic purpose, is overly broad in targeting
abuses, and would adversely affect many normal business transactions at a min-
imum by injecting a high level of uncertainty and requiring documentation of an
analysis for tax purposes that has no other meaning or business purpose.
My comments today supplement and refine those we provided last Spring to the
House Ways and Means Committee and Senate Finance Committee when we were
addressing the President’s budget proposals related to corporate tax shelters. I have
attached our statement from the Senate Finance Committee hearing on April 27,
1999.
Disclosure of Corporate Transactions
We continue to strongly support an effective disclosure mechanism to advise the
government of corporate transactions that warrant review. Structuring an effective
disclosure regime requires balancing the amount of detail, the timing of disclosure,
and the burden of disclosure on taxpayers and advisers.
Disclosure should provide enough information to the IRS to be helpful, but should
not include excessive detail that will make their review difficult. For tax return dis-
closure, we would encourage the use of Form 8275, which contains a concise state-
ment of the legal issues or nature of the controversy. This form could be adapted
for corporate tax shelter issues, possibly with check boxes for indicators of trans-
actions that the government might wish to review, such as the involvement of a tax
indifferent party, indemnities for the benefit of the corporate participant in a trans-
action, or other characteristics that the Committee determines are appropriate.
While advance disclosure (that is, before the return is filed) would help the gov-
ernment in some cases, it could be burdensome and should be limited to those situa-
tions where it would be most useful to the government. For both advance and return
disclosure, we suggest care be used to identify what the IRS can actually make use
of at each point in time. Disclosure requirements for advance and return filing
should be specific as to what is required, when, and by whom.
We recommend placing the burden of advance disclosure on the promoter, advisor,
opinion-writer, or salesman, rather than the taxpayer. Requiring both the taxpayer
and these third parties to disclose a transaction is burdensome and provides redun-
dant information to the IRS. Advance disclosure by the third parties will be more
helpful to the IRS in the timely identification of problem areas and will be more
effective in curtailing abuses by these third parties at an early point in time. We
suggest that each of the ‘‘responsible’’ third parties involved be responsible for the
reporting, unless there is agreement that one of them will take responsibility. This
will create the necessary tension between the parties to insure disclosure.
For disclosures in advance of filing, we encourage you to modify Section 6111 (reg-
istration of tax shelters). We suggest a ‘‘reportable transactions’’ regime as a sub-
stitute for the ‘‘tax shelter’’ transactions convention currently in place under Section
6111 to identify targets for pre-return disclosures. This approach would be more fo-
cused, less subjective, less laden with emotion, and would encourage disclosure.
In defining transactions to be disclosed on the return or in advance, we believe
there is merit in the approach of developing fairly objective ‘‘indicators’’ of the sorts
of transactions to which the government wants to give special attention. However,
both Treasury and the Joint Committee staffs have suggested some indicators that
we believe would sweep in many ordinary business transactions. For example, the
proposed indicator of a permanent book/tax accounting difference, would include
key-man insurance, purchased intangibles, and the use of stock options as employee
compensation. Another proposed indicator would look at the economic substance of
a transaction, using a pre-tax profits analysis that would result in a number of ordi-
nary transactions being classified as ‘‘tax shelters.’’ For example, many incentives
that Congress enacted to encourage taxpayers to undertake transactions that are
not susceptible to this bottom-line analysis, like the research credit or even chari-
table contributions, would have to be reported or be specifically excluded from this
test in legislation. It would be impossible to compare the pre-tax profits with ex-
pected tax benefits in many ordinary transactions because the economic return is
unknown, such as stock purchased on margin or real estate purchased with non-
recourse debt. Other normal business transactions, such as leasing, financing or ad-
vertising, are not susceptible to an analysis which requires a determination of the
expected pre-tax return from the transaction. Indeed, the Treasury Department’s
study pointed out that the courts have been reluctant to employ this kind of anal-
ysis in testing the vitality of transactions for tax purposes.
We are particularly concerned that the five tax shelter indicators in the Joint
Committee staff recommendations would automatically deem a transaction to con-
stitute a tax shelter defined under current law as having ‘‘a significant purpose’’ of
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00075 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
72
1 In Short, our recommendation is not intended to layer another regime for ‘‘reportable trans-
actions’’ on top of those in current law, but to stimulate consideration of a means to restructure
and simplify the substantial understatement penalty for certain transactions, and to better co-
ordinate those with the disclosure requirements.
avoiding or evading Federal income tax. Defining a corporate tax shelter by ref-
erence to having a ‘‘significant purpose’’ of tax avoidance or evasion has not proved
helpful in determining the proper target, and even Treasury has not yet been able
to produce regulations after two years. We believe the Joint Committee staff ap-
proach of using more objective indicators is better, but they should be used as a sub-
stitute for the current law standards of ‘‘tax shelters.’’ These factors should be objec-
tive and could be adjusted as more information becomes available and new trends
are identified. Also, the Joint Committee staff recommendation contains a double
jeopardy—if a transaction does not fall within one of these indicators, the IRS could
still argue that a significant purpose of the transaction is the prohibited avoidance
or evasion, and thus subject to additional disclosure requirements and higher pen-
alties. In short, from the government’s perspective, it’s ‘‘heads, I win; tails, you (may
well) lose.’’
We urge consideration be given to developing a more neutral approach, such as
our suggested ‘‘reportable transactions’’ regime. The results may well be the same:
the need for disclosure and a potentially higher penalty structure, but the
judgmental tone is removed and the issue becomes one of mechanical reporting, not
of emotion. If a transaction satisfies an indicator, it is subject to a disclosure and
enhanced penalty structure; if it does not, it should be subject to the normal penalty
regime (including disclosure as an abating criterion).
Some of the proposals before you try to avoid affecting normal business trans-
actions resulting from overly-broad indicators by exempting specific types of trans-
actions. We recommend a different approach. If a broad economic purpose test is re-
tained, we believe the best way to reach the Chairman’s stated objective of not ad-
versely impacting normal business and financial transactions is to provide excep-
tions for defined categories of transactions. Our categories would include trans-
actions that meet a business purpose test, are consistent with the legislative intent
of the applicable provision, or are expected to produce returns that are reasonable
in relation to the cost and risk of the transaction.
Finally, there should also be a de minimis level below which transactions do not
need to meet additional disclosure requirements or be subject to extraordinary pen-
alties, and we agree with the American Bar Association’s proposals for a minimum
of $1 million in professional fees or $10 million in tax benefits. This will avoid appli-
cation of this regime to smaller taxpayers and less-sophisticated practitioners. We
note that some proposals offered would apply to individual taxpayers. We suggest
that any higher penalties and disclosure requirements should apply to corporate
taxpayers initially, and expanded to other taxpayers, if necessary, only after the re-
portable transaction regime is well established.
Penalties
We believe that the ‘‘reportable transactions’’ regime for disclosure could be car-
ried over into the substantive penalty area under Section 6662(d).1 A reportable
transaction would have to be disclosed on the tax return or the taxpayer would face
heavier penalties. Disclosure will help the IRS identify problem issues, and, coupled
with penalties where a position taken does not have sufficient merit, will provide
a strong deterrent against abusive transactions. For reportable transactions that are
disclosed but that lack substantial authority and lack a sound opinion concluding
‘‘more likely than not’’ on the merits, the 20% penalty of current law should apply.
A somewhat higher penalty on reportable transactions that are not disclosed would
provide an economic incentive for disclosure as would our suggestion in earlier testi-
mony that where the requisite standard is met and disclosure has been made, there
should be no penalty.
We do not support the Joint Committee staff’s proposed 75% likelihood standard.
The current more-likely-than-not standard is comprehensible in application where
the practitioner and taxpayer have to determine that they have the preponderance
of authority. Even this is not easy in situations where little guidance or case law
exists. Determining the degree of certainty to a specific percentage is virtually im-
possible, and will be difficult for the IRS and courts to apply. It would also set a
higher standard than would be required to prevail on the merits of a case.
We do not believe there should be a penalty on the taxpayer for failure to disclose
on a tax return where there is no understatement of tax. Although we understand
the intent of this proposal, a flat-dollar amount would not act as a deterrent, and
other formulations of the penalty are too complex for the potential benefit that
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00076 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
73
might be provided. Similarly, we do not support any strict liability penalties, believ-
ing that the IRS should have the ability to waive penalties when justified.
We believe that a standard must be established under Circular 230 for all tax
shelter opinion letters. The current rules should be expanded to cover ‘‘tax shelter’’
opinions outside the third party context and should be better coordinated with the
existing penalty rules. There are other aspects of Circular 230 that can also be
brought to bear on abusive tax shelters, and we will work with the bar, enrolled
agents, and the Treasury to improve Circular 230. Within the AICPA, we are re-
viewing the ethical conduct of practitioners involved in corporate tax shelter cases,
and are determined to maintain the highest level of responsibility of our members.
Most individuals who practice before the IRS are responsible professionals who
have nothing to do with abusive tax shelters. Unfortunately, many individuals in-
volved in developing, advising, and selling of tax shelters are not professionals who
are subject to Circular 230 (that is, not an attorney, CPA, or enrolled agent). The
penalties for aiding and abetting the understatement of tax liability could be ex-
panded to include these third parties. Also, promoter and advisor penalties should
be imposed for failure to disclose when transactions are developed and sold, and
these could be fashioned along the lines of Section 6707, as a percentage of fees,
and could be expanded to apply to investment bankers, opinion writers, insurance
companies, and others who are involved in such transactions. For practitioners gov-
erned by Circular 230, sanctions can include suspension from practice before the
IRS or disbarment, and we would encourage tough penalties for others who engage
in abusive conduct.
Due Diligence by Corporations
We have been told that a common problem with abusive tax shelters is that tax
opinions on certain transactions often do not match the actual facts. This has led
to proposals that corporate officers be required to be more diligent in their examina-
tion of positions taken in tax returns. We support the requirement of a ‘‘corporate
officer attestation’’ on the return, disclosing reportable transactions. Our suggestion
is that a corporate official having knowledge of the facts, rather than one having a
position with a particular title within the corporation, would be required to sign the
attestation. The legislative report should make clear that the official could reason-
ably rely on expert opinions as to the tax law, valuations, etc., and on other respon-
sible corporate personnel as to factual matters. We do not believe that attestation
should carry personal liability, as this extreme sanction may not be appropriate for
the conduct of the corporate official. Also, large companies frequently insure their
officials against liability so that personal liability would often be deflected.
Conclusion
We strongly oppose the undermining of our tax system by convoluted and con-
fusing tax sophistry. Clearly, there are abuses and they must be dealt with effec-
tively. However, we have a complex tax system and believe that taxpayers should
be entitled to structure transactions to take advantage of intended incentives and
to pay no more tax than is required by the law. Drawing this delicate balance is
at the heart of the issue we are addressing today. We urge you to continue the dif-
ficult discussions that develop from today’s hearings until a greater consensus can
be reached as to the best possible legislative approach. We offer our ideas and as-
sistance in developing an effective and efficient approach to curtailing abusive tax
shelters.
[An attachment is being retained in the Committee files.]
f
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Shewbridge.
STATEMENT OF CHARLES W. SHEWBRIDGE, III, CHIEF TAX EX-
ECUTIVE, BELLSOUTH CORPORATION, ATLANTA, GEORGIA,
AND PRESIDENT, TAX EXECUTIVES INSTITUTE, INC.
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I am Chuck Shewbridge, chief tax executive for
BellSouth Corporation in Atlanta, Georgia. I am here today as
president of Tax Executives Institute, the preeminent group of in-
house tax professionals in North America. Our 5,000 members rep-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00077 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
74
resent the 2,800 largest corporations in the United States and Can-
ada. We appreciate the opportunity to testify because this subject
is of vital importance to the tax system.
Rather than summarizing my entire testimony, I wish to high-
light two important issues.
Mr. Chairman, TEI’s perspective differs from that of other orga-
nizations represented on this panel. The Institute does not rep-
resent the so-called tax shelter promoters and developers who ei-
ther sell or facilitate the transactions, and we do not represent the
professional advisers who opine on the legitimacy of the arrange-
ments. Rather, TEI members work directly for the corporations
that enter into business transactions that require an analysis of
their tax benefits and burdens. In other words, TEI members are
in the thick of it. We, along with the government, have the most
at stake in trying to craft a workable solution to this challenge.
Before proceeding, Mr. Chairman, I want to endorse a comment
that Congressman Doggett made last week. He recommended that
both sides avoid immoderate rhetoric, which I interpret as meaning
we should act on facts and not on feelings. Thus, I think it is both
unfair and inaccurate to make blanket statements about the cause
and scope of the tax shelter problem. And if I might, I wish to reg-
ister my particular disagreement with the comment in the ABA’s
written statement that ‘‘corporate tax managers often believe they
have nothing to lose by entering into an aggressive tax shelter.’’
Yes, there may be so-called bad actors in the tax community who
promote, opine on and otherwise facilitate, or participate in aggres-
sive transactions. I believe, however, that we must guard against
overstatement.
I have been a tax professional for nearly 30 years and have been
employed by BellSouth for half of that period. As the company’s
senior tax official, I am ultimately responsible for the 40,000 Fed-
eral, State, local and foreign returns we file annually. BellSouth’s
1998 Federal income tax return, which I signed earlier this year,
reflects aggregate tax payments of more than $1.6 billion. Given
the size of those numbers, and given the fact that I sign
BellSouth’s tax returns under penalties of perjury, it should go
without saying that I take my job, including my responsibility to
the tax system, seriously. So do my colleagues at TEI.
Although I question some of the rhetoric that has been used dis-
cussing tax shelters, I think it is very important to note significant
areas of agreement. We agree that over aggressive tax-advantaged
products are being marketed. We agree that the IRS must do more
to challenge and curtail these transactions, including raising prac-
titioner standards and, where appropriate, asserting penalties more
frequently. And we agree that better, fuller disclosure, including
early warning disclosure by promoters, lies at the heart of success-
fully dealing with the situation.
Where we disagree, Mr. Chairman, is in very important details.
First, as an organization of women and men who will have to com-
ply with whatever disclosure regime is enacted, TEI does not be-
lieve that concerns about the definition of a corporate tax shelter
can be cavalierly dismissed. It has been suggested that a tax shel-
ter is any transaction where the potential business or economic
benefit is immaterial or insignificant, in relation to the tax benefit.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00078 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
75
1See Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation, Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest Pro-
visions as Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform
Act of 1998 (Including Provisions Relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) (JCS–3–99) (July 22,
Continued
With three decades experience, I think I know what is meant by
the words ‘‘material’’ and ‘‘insignificant,’’ and I strongly believe that
BellSouth has engaged in no abusive tax shelters. But I am very
much concerned that some time in the future a revenue agent may
disagree with me. At that point the issue will be joined as both
sides may be forced to engage experts to argue over the meaning
of ‘‘significant’’ and ‘‘material’’ and, in the case of the ABA’s pro-
posal, whether the $10 million disclosure threshold has been
crossed.
Mr. Chairman, TEI believes it is critical to know what we are
talking about. The definition of ‘‘tax shelter’’ must be as objective
as possible. Thus, we look forward to working with the Treasury
and the congressional staffs and our colleagues in the practitioner
community in refining the definition of corporate tax shelters.
The second issue I wish to discuss is the proposal that the chief
financial officer or another senior officer be required to certify that
the facts disclosed about a tax shelter transaction are true and cor-
rect. TEI believes the proposal misses the mark. It misapprehends
the role of the tax department as well as the CFO, it impugns the
integrity and professionalism of both, and it ignores how the provi-
sion would adversely affect the examination process.
The proposal is flawed because it proceeds from the faulty
premise that companies unknowingly enter into major transactions,
and that the people who prepare and sign billion dollar corporate
returns do so lightly. I certainly do not. It is totally without basis
to say that a company’s senior officers would permit abusive trans-
actions to go forward but for the sanctions that would flow from the
proposal.
TEI’s concerns, however, go beyond the proposal’s attack on the
professionalism of corporate tax directors. It poses a serious threat
to tax administration. If enacted, the proposal could lead to focus
not on the underlying transaction, but on the CFO’s statement.
Hence the key would not be whether a transaction passes muster
under the law, but rather ‘‘what did the senior officer know and
when did he know it.’’ We regret that the proposal could easily
spawn suspicion and distrust comparable to that which existed in
the 1970s concerning questionable payments to foreign persons.
In conclusion, TEI supports meaningful action in this area, but
before legislation is enacted, the proposal must be refined. We look
forward to working with the Committee to this end. Thank you.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you, Mr. Shewbridge.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of Charles W. Shewbridge, III, Chief Tax Executive, BellSouth
Corporation, Altanta, Georgia, and President, Tax Executives Institute, Inc.
I am Charles W. Shewbridge, III, Chief Tax Executive for BellSouth Corporation
in Atlanta, Georgia. I appear before you today as the President of Tax Executives
Institute, the preeminent group of corporate tax professionals in North America.
The Institute is pleased to participate in the Committee’s hearing on corporate tax
shelters and to provide, among other things, comments on the proposals and rec-
ommendations offered by the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation and the
Treasury Department.1
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00079 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
76
1999); Office of Tax Policy, U.S. Department of the Treasury, The Problem of Corporate Tax
Shelters: Discussion, Analysis and Legislative Proposals (July 1999).
2Most of the companies represented by our members are part of the IRS’s Coordinated Exam-
ination Program (CEP), pursuant to which they are audited on an ongoing basis.
Mr. Chairman, this subject is a very important one to TEI members, to the tax
community generally, and to the tax system as a whole. In the press release an-
nouncing this hearing, Chairman Archer identified the following five issues for con-
sideration:
•The nature and scope of the perceived corporate tax shelter problem;
•The manner in which the IRS and the courts are currently addressing corporate
tax shelters;
•Additional steps that the Administration could take under current law to ad-
dress such tax shelters;
•Additional legislation that might be necessary to address corporate tax shelters;
and
•Procedures the Administration has in place or could adopt, or that Congress
could enact, to ensure that new or existing enforcement tools brought to bear on cor-
porate tax shelters do not interfere with legitimate business transactions or make
more difficult the application of an already complex income tax.
After providing background on Tax Executives Institute and my own experience
as a tax executive, I will address each of these issues.
I. BACKGROUND: THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE IN-HOUSE TAX PROFESSIONAL
Tax Executives Institute was established in 1944 to serve the professional needs
of in-house tax practitioners. Today, the Institute has 52 chapters in the United
States, Canada, and Europe. Our 5,000 members are accountants, attorneys, and
other business professionals who work for the largest 2,800 companies in the United
States and Canada; they are responsible for conducting the tax affairs of their com-
panies and ensuring their compliance with the tax laws. Hence, TEI members deal
with the tax code in all its complexity, as well as with the Internal Revenue Service,
on almost a daily a basis.2 TEI is dedicated to the development and effective imple-
mentation of sound tax policy, to promoting the uniform and equitable enforcement
of the tax laws, and to reducing the cost and burden of administration and compli-
ance to the benefit of taxpayers and government alike. Our background and experi-
ence enable us to bring a unique and, we believe, balanced perspective to the subject
of corporate tax shelters.
Put another way, TEI’s perspective differs from that of other organizations that
have commented on this issue. The Institute does not represent the so-called tax
shelter promoters and developers (including investment bankers) who either sell or
facilitate the transactions. We do not represent the professional advisers (be they
attorneys or accountants) who opine on the legitimacy of the arrangements. Rather,
TEI’s members work directly for the corporations that regularly enter into business
transactions that require an analysis of their tax benefits and burdens. These com-
panies have professional staffs dedicated to minimizing their tax liability while en-
suring compliance with the law. To this end, these companies evaluate particular
transactions (whether developed by their own staffs or brought to the companies by
outside advisers or promoters), decide whether or not these offerings pass muster—
not only in terms of the substantive requirements of the tax law but, importantly,
in terms of their own business needs and corporate culture—and, if they proceed,
report the transactions on their tax returns and defend them on audit. Ultimately,
of course, these companies face potential exposure to sanctions (and public oppro-
brium) should their analysis of a transaction not be sustained. In other words, TEI’s
members are in the thick of it. We along with the government have the most at
stake in trying to craft an equitable tax system that is administrable.
Although I am here today on TEI’s behalf, I wish to provide some context for my
testimony about my role as Chief Tax Executive for BellSouth Corporation. I have
been a tax professional for nearly 30 years, and have been employed by BellSouth
for half of that period. As the company’s senior tax official, I am ultimately respon-
sible for 40,000 federal, state, local, and foreign returns that BellSouth files each
year. The company’s 1998 federal income tax return, which I signed earlier this
year, reflected an aggregate federal income tax liability of more than $1.6 billion.
Given the size of that number, it should go without saying that I take my job seri-
ously. In discharging my duties, I oversee a staff of more than 100 people. We see
our job as twofold—first, to ensure BellSouth’s compliance with the state, local, fed-
eral, and international tax laws and, second, to serve the company’s shareholders
by ensuring that we pay only the taxes required by law. This second facet of the
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00080 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
77
3The Bureau of National Affairs recently reported that a senior Treasury Department official
had said that so-called abusive shelters ‘‘have arisen at a time when the culture of corporate
tax departments has changed from one in which compliance was its primary function to one in
which it is expected to generate money-saving opportunities.’’ ‘‘Piecemeal Solutions to Tax Shel-
ter Problems Contribute to Growth, Treasury Officials Says,’’ BNA Daily Tax Report No. 210,
at G–8 (November 1, 1999).
4Charles Adams, For Good and Evil: The Impact of Taxes on the Course of Civilization 15–
25 (1993).
5 That tax planning by itself violates no moral code or substantive provision of the tax law
has long been confirmed by the courts. Perhaps the most famous formulation of this axiom is
Judge Learned Hand’s: ‘‘[A]nyone may so arrange his affairs that his taxes shall be as low as
possible; he is not bound to choose that pattern which will best pay the Treasury; there is not
even a patriotic duty to increase one’s taxes.’’ Helvering v. Gregory, 69 F.2d 809, 810 (2d Cir.
1934), aff’d, 293 U.S. 465 (1935) (‘‘;The legal right of a taxpayer to decrease the amount of what
otherwise would be his taxes, or altogether avoid them, by means which the law permits, cannot
be doubted.’’).
6While recognizing that the precise level of noncompliance owing to so-called tax shelter activ-
ity may be difficult to quantify, TEI has been very much concerned about broad statements of
the enormity of the problem without empirical support. We are pleased that the IRS recently
announced its intention to attempt to identify the scope of the problem. Assuming the method-
ology of the IRS’s initiative is sound (and does not rely on revenue agents and others self-defin-
ing tax shelters as any transaction that produces a tax benefit they disagree with), it should
meaningfully contribute to the process.
job is not new and it is not something that we shrink from defending. Concededly,
those who seek to influence the debate by the language they use pejoratively de-
scribe today’s tax department as a ‘‘profit center,’’ 3 but the desire to reduce—and
the legitimacy of reducing—one’s tax liability is as old as the Rosetta Stone 4 and
as legitimate as seeking shelter from the cold or rain.5 With due respect, TEI sug-
gests that those who wish to consign corporate tax departments to the role of scriv-
eners, filling out tax returns, fundamentally misunderstand the historical, and we
submit wholly proper, role of in-house tax professionals. Similarly, those who pro-
ceed on the assumption that tax executives neither understand nor willingly em-
brace our professional and legal responsibility to ensure our companies’ compliance
with the tax laws do us, our companies, our shareholders, and—equally important—
the tax system a disservice. To be sure, there may be taxpayers who willfully or in-
advertently cross over the line, just as there may be practitioners, promoters, rev-
enue agents, government lawyers, and others who do the same. It would be a mis-
take, however, without sufficient empirical evidence to suggest that the problem is
pandemic.6 Let there be no mistake: TEI supports reasonable administrative, judi-
cial, and legislative steps to address the tax shelter issue, but the steps must be
measured, targeted, and based on fact, not feeling. Thus, we take to heart Congress-
man Doggett’s statement last week that ‘‘immodest rhetoric’’ has no place in this
debate. We regret, however, that such rhetoric seemingly emanates more often from
those seeking to enact legislation than from those who seek to clarify its scope and
effect. While we agree that if the tax system does not respond to noncompliance or
to sham transactions, public confidence in the fairness of the system will be dimin-
ished, we also believe that public confidence can be equally impaired by the enact-
ment of overreaching and overbroad legislation.
II. WHAT IS THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF THE PERCEIVED CORPORATE TAX SHELTER
PROBLEM?
Before enacting expansive legislation dealing with corporate tax shelters, Con-
gress is well advised both to ask and to answer the question ‘‘What is meant by
the term ‘corporate tax shelter’?’’ It is not a question whose answer can be assumed.
It is likewise not a question whose answer can be put off indefinitely. Whether you
view the solution as lying in increased disclosure, the enactment of an economic sub-
stance doctrine or business purpose test, the imposition of new penalties, or ‘‘just’’
the racheting up of the IRS’s enforcement activities, the definition must be both
knowable and known. At this junction, TEI questions whether it is.
Thus, the Treasury Department and the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation
have both issued substantial and serious studies that provide much food for thought
on the subject of corporate tax shelters. Both have devoted considerable resources
to identifying the scope of the problem from their perspectives and to crafting pro-
posed substantive definitions of ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ that attempt to measure the
tax benefits of a transaction against its economic substance. Although we greatly
respect the expertise and good faith of those involved—although we very much ap-
preciate their efforts to date to respond to taxpayer and tax practitioner concerns
and to refine their approaches—we remain concerned that the proposals rely too
much on amorphous and unworkable concepts that pose challenges to tax adminis-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00081 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
78
7E.g., ‘‘Piecemeal Solutions to Tax Shelter Problems Contribute to Growth, Treasury Officials
Says,’’ BNA Daily Tax Report No. 210, at G–8 (November 1, 1999) (remarks of Joseph M.
Mikrut, Treasury’s Tax Legislative Counsel).
8 Stated differently, we fear that without clear limits, ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’might become lit-
tle more than the word ‘‘glory’’ in Through the Looking Glass: meaning whatever a revenue
agent, like Humpty Dumpty, says it means. Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Glass 186 (Sig-
net Classic 1960) (‘‘ ‘When I use a word [‘glory’], Humpty Dumpty said, in a rather scornful tone,
‘‘it means just what I choose it to mean—neither more nor less.’ ’’).
9 The need to recognize that actions can be wholly motivated by tax considerations and still
be proper is illustrated by the following, concededly simplistic example: A woman is walking
down the street and comes upon a homeless person, asking for money so he can buy something
to eat. If the woman pulls a five-dollar bill out of her pocket and hands it to the man, she has
effected a transaction that has an economic cost to her but no favorable tax consequences. Now
assume she walks the man across the street to a homeless shelter that has secured tax-exempt
status. As the homeless man enters the soup line, the woman writes a check for a tax-deductible
contribution to the shelter. She has engaged in essentially the same economic transaction but
has taken additional steps, arguably only to secure the tax benefits of writing the check to the
charity running the homeless shelter. Should she be denied a tax deduction for her contribution
to a charity—in the nomenclature of the day, a tax-indifferent party—because her motivation
for the action generating the deduction was solely to reduce her tax liability?
10TEI believes it is necessary to recognize the part that Congress, the Treasury Department,
and the IRS each play in creating an environment in which so-called corporate tax shelters can
flourish. Each of the government players, too, bears responsibility—for how the law reads
(warts, ‘‘discontinuities,’’ and all), how it is interpreted, and how it applies. Thus, TEI must ac-
knowledge its frustration that the Administration has not sought to address either the com-
plexity that characterizes the tax law or the unfair, one-sided provisions that, while crafted for
a ‘‘pro-government’’ purpose, are often turned on their head by taxpayers in what is later
deemed to be a tax shelter. For example, the contingent payment regulations that the taxpayer
invoked in the ACM case were drafted by the government in a manner to be used against tax-
payers; the taxpayers in that case simply tried to utilize the rules for their own benefit. An even-
handed rule would not have presented even the opportunity for abuse.
tration and may well sweep into the ‘‘tax shelter’’ net many legitimate transactions
for the simple reason that they produce a tax benefit to the taxpayer.
Indeed, we are disappointed that some believe that lack of clarity is a virtue.
Thus, the Treasury Department has previously framed the issue as between ‘‘rules’’
and ‘‘standards’’ (the latter being more general) and has recently suggested that
what is necessary is a simple ex ante standard basically providing ‘‘Thou Shalt Not
Abuse the Tax Code.’’ 7 TEI is concerned, however, that such a hortative approach
to the Nation’s heretofore rules-based tax system could be counterproductive, ulti-
mately disrupting routine business transactions by emboldening revenue agents or
others to challenge any tax planning idea or transaction as a corporate tax shelter.
In other words, unless the definition is clear—or, at least, considerably clearer
than it currently is—there will remain too great a possibility that the vague label
‘‘tax shelter’’ will be invoked as a shibboleth to cut off debate. To be sure, the effect
of such a broad-brush approach may be to prevent certain abusive transactions, but
it may also be to vitiate a taxpayer’s right to minimize its tax obligations without
first examining the facts and circumstances of a particular transaction and then as-
sessing how its business purpose and economic substance comport with the explicit
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.8 Thus, TEI submits that any legislative
action addressing abusive or over-aggressive transactions must acknowledge the role
of legitimate tax planning to minimize corporate tax expense. Legitimate tax plan-
ning can include transactions undertaken solely for tax reduction purposes, such as
financing a company with the issuance of debt rather than equity,9 and a taxpayer
should not have to proceed through litigation to validate legitimate tax planning.
We have gone on at some length about the definitional problems not because we
seek to staunch any meaningful action by the Treasury Department, IRS, and Con-
gress, but rather because we take seriously our obligation to help improve the sys-
tem. TEI agrees that the current situation cannot be ignored. As tax executives, we
see the challenge to the tax system every day. The unrelenting complexity of the
law breeds opportunity.10 The interaction of various intricate provisions of the Inter-
nal Revenue Code leads to uncertainty for taxpayers about the proper limits of tax
planning and the line between legitimate and illegitimate transactions. Moreover,
the uncertainty encourages some—especially those who stand to reap substantial
fees and rewards with little or no risk of loss—to abuse or game the system. While
the evidence is only anecdotal, TEI is very much concerned that abusive products
or transactions are being developed, marketed, and purchased. In our view, this
phenomenon poses a challenge to the efficacy of the tax system. If the problem of
abusive products is not addressed, the integrity of the tax system may be weakened
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00082 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
79
11TEI also believes that, since the problem extends beyond corporate taxpayers (with some
of the suspect products’ being sold to partnerships and individuals), any solution crafted by Con-
gress should not be confined to corporations.
12 Some examples of the Treasury Department’s and the IRS’s using their regulatory power
to challenge certain classes of transactions include the partnership anti-abuse regulations
Continued
or, at a minimum, the perception of the tax system’s fairness impaired. Hence, ac-
tion is required.
At the same time, the problems with the current proposals can likewise not be
ignored. There is no simple, easy solution to the corporate tax shelter ‘‘problem.’’
The key is realistically assessing the causes of the problems and then designing
measured, balanced approaches to dealing with them without adding even more
complexity to the already overburdened tax law. In the final analysis, rules must
be developed that encourage all participants to exercise self-restraint. Ultimately,
it is the corporation that is responsible for what is reported on its tax return, but
in our view it is wrong to suggest that the problem lies only with taxpayers them-
selves and that the solutions should be directed only at them. Accordingly, TEI is
pleased that the Treasury Department, the staff of the Joint Committee on Tax-
ation, and others have concluded that attention must be paid to both the promoters
of tax-advantaged products and to the outside advisers whose opinions facilitate the
marketing of such products. We are certainly not claiming that sophisticated tax-
payers are ‘‘victims,’’ but in our view the solutions must reach the organizations and
advisers who put unduly aggressive ‘‘products’’ into play.11
III. THE MANNER IN WHICH THE IRS AND COURTS HAVE ADDRESSED TAX SHELTERS
When the Ways and Means Committee held its first hearing on the Administra-
tion’s tax shelter proposals last spring, several witnesses testified that while the De-
partment of the Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service had several tools at
their disposal to combat ‘‘abusive’’ corporate transactions, the agencies had failed to
make appropriate use of those tools. Perhaps more fundamentally, it was questioned
whether the Treasury had sufficiently demonstrated that the provisions of the cur-
rent tax code are inadequate to staunch the perceived growth of tax shelters. TEI
agrees that there is a powerful array of tools available to address abuses—from sub-
stantive provisions already in the tax code, to the authority to issue notices and reg-
ulations to halt specific abuses, to the ability to target transactions for litigation
using one or more common-law anti-abuse doctrines.
Experience teaches that these tools can be and have been successfully invoked to
curb several questionable transactions. For example, there have been a number of
cases in which the courts have upheld the IRS’s challenge to the business purpose
or economic substance of a transaction that generated significant tax benefits. See,
e.g., ACM Partnership v. Commissioner, 73 T.C.M. 2189 (1997), aff’d in part, rev’d
in part, 157 F.3d 231 (3rd Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 119 S. Ct. 1251 (1999); ASA
Investerings Partnership v. Commissioner, 76 T.C.M. 325 (1998), on appeal to Fed.
Circuit; United Parcel Service of America, Inc. v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo No. 268
(1999); Compaq Computer Corporation v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 17 (Sept. 21,
1997); IES Industries v. United States, No. C97–206 (N.D. Iowa, Sept. 22, 1999);
Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc. v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 21 (Oct. 19, 1999); and Saba
Partnership v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo. 1999–359 (Oct. 27, 1999). Indeed, the last
five of these government-favorable decisions were issued in the past three months.
Let me be clear, Mr. Chairman: TEI does not necessarily subscribe to the view that
all of these decisions involved ‘‘corporate tax shelters,’’ even assuming the govern-
ment’s challenge to the transactions at issue were properly sustained. We do believe,
however, that the cases illustrate the arguments and resources—and power—the
IRS can successfully bring to bear when it concludes that taxpayers have engaged
in improper transactions.
In addition, the Treasury Department and the IRS have not been reticent to issue
regulations, rulings, and announcements challenging the purported tax benefits of
certain transactions. Most recently, the IRS issued Rev. Rul. 99–14, 1999–13 I.R.B.
3, which addresses so-called lease-in/lease-out (LILO) real estate transactions, which
often involve the leasing of property by a foreign party, often a municipality, to a
U.S. taxpayer, followed by the sublease of the same property by the U.S. taxpayer
to the foreign party. Explaining that the transactions are structured to produce sig-
nificant tax benefits based on the deduction of prepaid rent with little or no busi-
ness risk, the ruling states that the IRS will scrutinize LILO transactions for lack
of economic substance and, where appropriate, recharacterize these transactions for
tax purposes based on their substance.12
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00083 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
80
(Treas. Reg. § 1.701–2), the anti-conduit financing regulations (Treas. Reg. § 1.881–3 and Prop.
Reg. §1.7701(l)–2), and recently proposed regulations concerning fast-pay stock (Prop. Reg.
§1.7701(l)–3). Moreover, the Treasury Department and the IRS have acted to pre-empt many
transactions by formally announcing an intention to issue regulations attacking transactions
with which they disagree. Examples of such administrative notices include those involving fast-
pay stock (Notice 97–21, 1997–1 C.B. 407), foreign tax credit transactions (Notice 98–5, 1998–
3 I.R.B. 49), and transactions involving foreign hybrid entities (Notice 98–11, 1998–6 I.R.B. 13).
The Treasury has on occasion made its notices retroactive, which by itself dissuades taxpayers
from undertaking transactions that the government might deem abusive. The foregoing list is
not exhaustive, but it does illustrate the Treasury’s and the IRS’s willingness and ability to
challenge abusive transactions without new legislation.
Finally, the Treasury has proven effective in persuading Congress to act to amend
the Internal Revenue Code where legislation is necessary to prevent taxpayers from
receiving unintended benefits. Thus, as the Chairman noted when calling this hear-
ing, ‘‘since 1995, (Congress has) stopped $50 billion in tax abuses.’’ An example of
such legislation is the amendment earlier this year of section 357(c) to prevent the
artificial creation of basis. See §3001 of H.R. 435 (enacted June 25, 1999).
Nonetheless, TEI believes that more can and should be done to encourage the IRS
to employ—within the bounds of sound administrative practices and the exercise of
managerial discretion and congressional oversight—its current statutory and com-
mon law substantive and administrative tools to curb transactions that are per-
ceived as tax shelters. This includes the assertion of existing penalties in appro-
priate cases. The IRS must identify its workload requirements in order to determine
staffing needs. To our knowledge, this has not yet occurred. Accordingly, we believe
that the IRS’s current initiative to identify and quantify potentially troubling cor-
porate transactions is commendable.
Moreover, Congress must bear up to its responsibilities and ensure that the IRS
is consistently well-funded with appropriations. To be effective, the IRS must have
a well-trained workforce, and nowhere is this more true than with respect to the
complex transactions that have been challenged as corporate tax shelters. Congress
should ensure that the IRS has stable funding to meet its ongoing training needs.
IV. ADDITIONAL STEPS THAT THE ADMINISTRATION CAN TAKE UNDER CURRENT LAW
Before enacting new legislation, the Ways and Means Committee is right to ask
whether there are additional steps that can be taken under current law. TEI be-
lieves there are. More fundamentally, we believe that there are administrative and
regulatory steps the Treasury Department and the IRS must take even if legislation
is enacted to enhance the disclosure of questionable transactions or otherwise ad-
dress the tax shelter issue. Stated differently, the tax shelter problem is not one
that Congress alone can cure. There is no legislative panacea, no single step or se-
ries of steps that Congress can take and thereby relieve the Treasury and the IRS
of their ongoing responsibility. The Treasury and the IRS must continue to play
their roles and if they fail to do so, they should be held accountable.
For example, in 1997 Congress enacted a provision relating to the registration of
corporate tax shelters. Section 6111(d) of the Code was intended to help the IRS ob-
tain useful information about corporate transactions at an early stage in order to
identify transactions that should be audited and then take additional action—
through enforcement proceedings, regulatory changes, or targeted legislative action.
The provision, however, does not become effective until the issuance of Treasury
regulations, and to date no such regulations have been issued. It may be that sec-
tion 6111(d) is flawed (for example, because it is keyed to the use of confidentiality
agreements and an excessively broad ‘‘significant purpose’’ test), but if the Treasury
proves no more willing or able to act under any new legislation than it has been
under current law, we believe it is reasonable to question why new legislation
should be enacted.
Section 6111(d) does not stand as the only provision that has not been effectively
used by the Treasury Department and the IRS. Questions could also be asked about
the government’s use of section 7408, which gives the government the authority to
enjoin tax shelter promoters, and section 7609(f), concerning the issuance of so-
called John Doe summonses to promoters. There is also a question about the Treas-
ury’s and IRS’s not toughening the rules of conduct that govern return preparers
and other practitioners. Perhaps more important, some have questioned whether the
IRS has made adequate use of section 269, which authorizes the IRS to disallow tax
benefits in respect of acquisitions made to evade or avoid income tax. Surely before
enacting a greatly expanded section 269 to disallow deductions, credits, exclusions,
or other allowances obtained in tax shelter transactions, the Treasury Department
and the IRS should be called into account for its current use—or disuse—of section
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00084 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
81
13 It may well be that compliance is affected more by the certainty (or uncertainty) of applica-
tion than by the level of the penalty.
14Coincidentally with the controversy about corporate tax shelters, the IRS has built an im-
pressive track record in cases it perceives as abusive. See, e.g., Jacobs Engineering Group, Inc.
v. United States, 97–1 U.S.T.C. ¶ 50,340, at 87,755 (C.D. Cal. 1997), aff’d, 99–1 U.S.T.C. ¶
50,335, at 87,786 (9th Cir. 1999); The Limited, Inc. v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 13 (Sept. 7,
1999), as well as the cases listed on page 11 of this testimony. What was missing was the IRS’s
willingness and ability to successfully assert penalties against sophisticated taxpayers. Signifi-
cantly, the IRS has begun to assert and the courts sustain penalties against large corporate tax-
payers. See Compaq Computer Corp. v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 17 (1999) and United Parcel
Service of America v. Commissioner, T.C.M. No. 268 (1999). This is a significant development,
for it not only underscores the continuing vitality of the common law business purpose require-
ment but cannot help but prompt otherwise aggressive taxpayers to modify their behavior.
15 For example, revised regulations could provide that a taxpayer may not rely on the opinion
of a professional adviser that fails to contain a complete and accurate description of the facts
underlying the transaction.
16 It is clear from the recent IRS victories in court that when the IRS becomes aware of a
potentially abusive transaction, judicial doctrines including those relating to sham, economic
substance, business purpose, substance over form, and step transaction—especially when cou-
pled with existing statutes such as sections 446, 482, 7701(l), and 269—provide the IRS with
significant tools to ensure that the system works. We are concerned that attempting to codify
the common law doctrines could further complicate and confuse the system and undermine le-
gitimate tax planning.
17Under section 6662, disclosure can have the effect of immunizing taxpayers from the accu-
racy-related penalty, but disclosure will not have this effect if a tax-shelter item is involved.
Ironically, then, current law has the perverse effect of discouraging disclosure of such items.
269. Similarly, we suggest that before Congress acts on proposals to double the ac-
curacy-related penalty, it should receive testimony from the IRS on both how fre-
quently the current 20-percent penalty has been asserted (and sustained by the
courts) and whether there is any evidence that the level of the penalty is insufficient
to encourage compliance.13
Stated simply, TEI believes that there can be no substitute for an effective en-
forcement program by the IRS. No statute or series of statutes, no single or group
of ex ante pronouncements, can eliminate the need for a well-trained workforce that
has the financial resources and the managerial will to get the job done. In other
words, the Institute believes the Administration should utilize all appropriate en-
forcement tools currently at its disposal, including the wider use of focused informa-
tion document requests and the assertion of penalties in appropriate cases.14 The
Treasury Department should also consider whether an amendment to the applicable
penalty regulations—most notably, Treas. Reg. 1.6664–4(c), relating to a taxpayer’s
ability to rely on an adviser’s opinion in establishing its eligibility for the reasonable
cause exception—are appropriate.15
Lastly, Mr. Chairman, we believe that the Treasury Department and the IRS (as
well as Congress) can alter the environment in which so-called corporate tax shel-
ters can flourish by working to simplify the law and to apply it in an evenhanded
manner. As previously stated, we believe many of today’s so-called tax shelters are
attributable to one-sided rules that were crafted for a ‘‘pro-government’’ purpose but
subsequently turned on their head.
V. ADDITIONAL LEGISLATION THAT MIGHT BE NECESSARY TO CURB SHELTER
ACTIVITY—AND LEGISLATION THAT IS ILL-ADVISED
To the extent Congress determines legislation is necessary, TEI believes that it
must be measured and restrained. Any response must carefully balance the benefit
of any legislative proposal against the possible adverse consequences, including the
likelihood that the provision would unduly interfere with routine business trans-
actions and legitimate tax planning, impose needless complexity, and inevitably op-
erate as a tax increase. It is imperative that Congress not overreact and enact a
general anti-abuse rule (sometimes referred to as a ‘‘super section 269’’ provision)
that would permit IRS agents to disallow transactions based solely on a subjective
finding that the taxpayer had a significant purpose of tax avoidance in entering into
a transaction. Such a provision would be exceedingly disruptive to ordinary business
transactions and tax planning.16
A. The Focus Should Be on Meaningful Disclosure
Disclosure of information to the IRS is a most effective element of tax enforce-
ment. Corporations are already required to reconcile their book and taxable incomes
on Schedule M–1 of the tax return.17 Indeed, the examination of corporate taxpayers
generally centers around the book and tax differences disclosed on that schedule.
During the course of an examination, taxpayers must expend considerable resources
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00085 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
82
18Thus, TEI agrees with the Joint Committee staff and Treasury Department that the tax
system may require adjustments to better balance the cost-benefit analysis undertaken by pro-
moters. Otherwise, a promoter may have little incentive to stop marketing abusive products. We
note that some have argued that promoter fees are the ‘‘oxygen’’ vital to the fire of tax shelter
products and they have therefore proposed that promoter penalties should be as much as 50
percent of the fees earned on the product and, further, that they be crafted so that the pro-
moters cannot avoid the incidence of the penalty by passing on the risk to clients. While TEI
believes that these proposals may merit consideration, the Institute has not yet taken a formal
position on them. We do believe, however, that should new promoter penalties be enacted, they
should afford promoters an independent review process that is separate from the examination
of the taxpayer’s return. Moreover, any legislation should make it clear that where a taxpayer
implements a sound tax planning idea in an abusive manner, penalties should not be imposed
on promoters.
19While section 6111(d), once operative through the issuance of regulations, will require reg-
istration of more transactions, that provision may not work as intended.
20TEI believes that a key to an effective early warning system involving promoters is the de-
velopment of clear ‘‘triggers’’ for disclosure. Hence, we suggest that a promoter’s disclosure could
be tied to (1) the receipt of a minimum level of fees by the promoter and (2) the presence of
other ‘‘indicators’’ or ‘‘filters’’ in a transaction. One possible approach would require the promoter
to file a statement with the IRS no later than 30 days after the receipt of $100,000 or more
in fees from two or more taxpayers in respect of that product (or a substantially similar prod-
uct). At a minimum, two or more tax shelter ‘‘indicators’’ or ‘‘filters’’ would be required (promoter
fees plus some other indicator) for a tax shelter transaction to be found. The disclosure state-
ment filed by the promoter would fully describe the product, the amount of fees collected, the
name and employer identification number of the clients, and which indicators were triggered.
Consideration should be given to affording promoters the opportunity to obtain an advance rul-
ing on whether a product should be registered. The purpose of the disclosure is to alert the IRS
that it might wish to examine the transaction. Whether through this or other means, taxpayers
with transactions meeting two or more ‘‘indicators’’ should be required to provide complete and
meaningful disclosure with their returns. While alerting the examiner to a potential problem
area, TEI strongly believes that the indicators should be used exclusively to trigger promoter
disclosures. Hence, any legislation should confirm that no inference should be drawn concerning
the proper treatment of a transaction that is subject to early disclosure by a promoter.
explaining, justifying, and supporting the differences. As a result, it is odd that the
Treasury and Joint Committee staff both focus on book-tax differences as an indi-
cator of a corporate tax shelter. These differences are not so much ‘‘indicators’’ as
they are an unavoidable byproduct of the Internal Revenue Code that Congress—
often with Treasury’s direct support—has crafted. Mr. Chairman, I do not believe
my company had any corporate tax shelters on the 1998 tax return that was just
filed in September. But I do know that we had more than 125 separate items dis-
closed on our company’s Schedule M–1 reconciling book and tax income.
The country’s largest 1,700 companies are subject to continual audit by the IRS
as part of the CEP program, but proponents of legislation downplay the significance
of this. Hence, the Joint Committee staff’s study states that ‘‘audits of large corpora-
tions typically follow an agreed agenda of issues that is negotiated by the IRS and
the corporate taxpayer’’ and both the Treasury Department and the Joint Com-
mittee staff refer repeatedly to the ‘‘audit lottery.’’ Taxpayers do strive to work coop-
eratively with the IRS, but they certainly are not capable of ‘‘walling off’’ some
issues from examination. In practice, it is the IRS audit team that determines what
transactions will be scrutinized. It is the IRS audit team that determines what in-
formation it needs. And it is the IRS audit team that ultimately determines what
adjustments to propose. Any implication that large corporate taxpayers can win the
‘‘audit lottery’’ by narrowing the scope of the audit does not reflect the realities of
the examination process. Mr. Chairman, you and the Committee may be assured
that when large taxpayers have a new, non-routine Schedule M–1 item on their re-
turn, it will be examined.
B. Possible Expansion of Disclosure Requirements
One deficiency in the current system is the lack of downside risk to those who
promote corporate tax shelters.18 This shortcoming could be addressed by imposing
a disclosure requirement on promoters of particular types of transactions.19 Indeed,
promoter disclosure could effectively operate as an ‘‘early warning’’ system that en-
ables IRS and the Treasury Department to evaluate products and issue guidance—
whether in the form of notices, rulings, or regulations—shutting down transactions
that are perceived as ‘‘abusive’’ before they proliferate. This will also enable the IRS
to marshal its resources and focus on examining transactions, including those un-
dertaken by non-CEP taxpayers (individuals and middle-market and small compa-
nies) for whom the perception of the risk of detection is skewed by the ‘‘audit lot-
tery.’’ TEI believes that an effective system will impose the obligation for early dis-
closure on the promoter.20 Because taxpayers will be required to make a detailed
disclosure on their tax returns in order to avoid penalties, we do not support the
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00086 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
83
21Lee Sheppard, ‘‘Slow and Steady Progress on Corporate Tax Shelters,’’ Tax Notes, July 12,
1999, at 194. Some proponents of the attestation requirement have previously expressed sur-
prise at TEI’s opposition to the proposal, suggesting that the requirement would take in-house
tax professionals ‘‘off the hook’’ by transferring responsibility to the CFO or another senior cor-
porate officer. Whether short sighted or not, we take our professional responsibility to our com-
panies and to our systems too seriously to support such a ‘‘pass the buck’’ strategy.
22 Specifically, we are concerned that revenue agents might use the possible assertion of pen-
alties against the CFO as a lever in their negotiation of the underlying tax treatment with the
corporate tax director. Thus, the discussion could go, as follows: ‘‘If you don’t concede the merits
of this transaction, I am going to refer your boss’s attestation to the criminal investigation divi-
sion.’’ Although according the attesting officer due process rights in respect of any penalty asser-
tion is important, we question whether that alone will ensure the provision is not used improp-
erly. Similar concerns make us less than sanguine about requiring companies to publicly dis-
close tax penalties above a certain dollar threshold in their financial statements.
imposition of a duplicate early disclosure requirement on taxpayers. As previously
suggested, for early disclosure to have the intended salutary effect, the IRS and the
Treasury must undertake to analyze and take appropriate action on the disclosed
transactions.
In addition, TEI believes steps can be taken to enhance the value of return disclo-
sures by taxpayers themselves. One means of ensuring that IRS examiners will not
miss issues, even in respect of CEP taxpayers, is to require a taxpayer to attach
a copy of the promoter’s disclosure notice to the taxpayer’s return. Furthermore, the
specific types of information that must be disclosed on the return in respect of cer-
tain transactions could be specified, either by Congress in the statute or in regula-
tions.
C. The Senior Corporate Officer Attestation Proposal Should Be Rejected
It has been proposed that Congress require the Chief Financial Officer or another
senior officer to certify that the facts disclosed (or reported on a return) about a tax-
shelter transaction are true and correct. Indeed, some proponents of legislation have
characterized such an attestation requirement as a ‘‘linchpin’’ in any successful ef-
fort to curb abusive tax shelters. Even if enhanced disclosure is appropriate, we re-
gret that this attestation proposal misses the mark. It misapprehends the role of
the tax department as well as the CFO, it impugns the integrity and profes-
sionalism of both, and it ignores how an attestation provision would adversely affect
the examination process. TEI strongly opposes its enactment.
Stated bluntly, the senior officer attestation proposal obfuscates the issue because
it proceeds from a faulty premise that companies do not enter into major trans-
actions knowingly and that the people who prepare and sign billion-dollar corporate
returns do so cavalierly. Corporate tax returns are already filed under penalties of
perjury, and while I will not presume to speak for all my peers, I defy the pro-
ponents of this proposal to identify a sufficient number of corporate tax directors
who take their return-signing duty so lightly as to justify the attestation require-
ment. As one commentator wrote recently in Tax Notes: ‘‘[I]f the corporate tax man-
ager does not have full knowledge of the facts of the corporation’s tax-motivated
transactions, why is he signing the return? And if he does not know what is going
on, why is anyone’s signature on the extra form necessary, except for show? ’’ 21
Equally important, it is totally without basis for proponents to say that a company’s
CFO and the other senior officers who might be subject to the attestation provision
would permit abusive transactions but for the sanctions that might flow from the
proposal.
Mr. Chairman, TEI’s objections to the attestation proposal go beyond its denigra-
tion of the professionalism of corporate tax directors. The proposal poses a serious
threat to the efficient operation of corporate tax return preparation and, especially,
the examination processes. If enacted, the proposal could lead to focusing not on the
underlying transaction but on the attestation. Hence, the key would not be whether
a transaction passes muster under the law, but rather ‘‘what did the senior officer
know and when did he know it?’’ Such inquiries could well result in intrusive or
threatening examination practices that the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act was
enacted to prevent.22 Indeed, the proposal could easily spawn suspicion and distrust
about the entire return preparation and examination process comparable to that
which existed during the era of the infamous ‘‘Eleven Questions’’ (relating to facili-
tation payments to foreign persons) in the 1970s.
For the foregoing reasons, we urge Congress to reject the senior officer attestation
proposal.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00087 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
84
23A collateral effect of the excessive pension plan penalty was to discourage taxpayers from
disclosing and correcting errors for fear that the action could result in disqualification. With the
advent of the employee plans compliance resolution system and its graded rewards and pen-
alties (i.e., intermediate sanctions and penalties), taxpayers are much more willing to volun-
tarily disclose errors for administrative resolution.
D. Changes to the Code’s Penalty Structure Must Be Measured
Although TEI believes that the primary focus of Congress should be ensuring
meaningful and timely disclosure of transactions, we recognize that a comprehensive
approach to this subject requires an examination of the Code’s penalty provisions,
including most particularly the accuracy-related penalty and the multitude of stand-
ards governing taxpayers, tax practitioners, and tax-return preparers. In proceeding,
we urge Congress to keep in mind the following:
1. We cannot help but comment on the complexity of the proposed penalty regime
set forth in the Joint Committee Study. Although seeking to consolidate and sim-
plify the various standards to which taxpayers, preparers, and promoters are sub-
ject, the Joint Committee staff was forced to create an 11 x 5 matrix to explain the
proposal. Concededly, one of the columns was devoted to listing current law, but it
remains that the proposal is highly complicated and supposes a level of mathe-
matical precision that does not exist in respect of what in many cases are essentially
judgment calls—does a transaction legitimately reduce taxes?
2. TEI is very much concerned about proposals to increase the accuracy-related
penalty in respect of certain tax shelter transactions to 40 percent. Indeed, we sug-
gest that a fundamental problem with the administration of the current 20-percent
penalty is that it is so high that it is rarely asserted against corporate taxpayers.
Where penalties are disproportionate compared with the conduct involved, agents
may be inhibited from asserting such penalties. Witness, for example, the penalty
for errors involving qualified plans before the intermediate sanction rules were en-
acted. Because the stated penalty—revocation of exempt status—was uniformly con-
sidered too harsh, agents rarely ever asserted it.23 Thus, while steps should be
taken to address the certainty of application, we do not at this time believe the level
of the accuracy-related penalty should be increased.
3. TEI believes that taxpayers should generally not be subject to penalties if they
make a complete and meaningful disclosure about a product or transaction in the
tax return and satisfy the applicable standard (see comment 5 below). If the tax-
payer fails to disclose a transaction that is subsequently deemed to be a tax shelter
and the taxpayer does not prevail on the merits, the taxpayer should be subject at
most to a 20-percent understatement penalty where it has substantial authority for
its treatmentpercent of an item. On the other hand, if a taxpayer fails to disclose
apercent transaction that should be disclosed because it meets objective
disclosurepercent criteria and the taxpayer prevails on the merits of the issue, it
may be appropriate to impose an information-reporting type penalty on the tax-
payer, the rate of which should not generally be linked to tax benefits at issue.
4. Given the complex nature of the tax law, TEI believes the enactment of a strict
liability penalty is wholly inappropriate. Penalties should be designed either to pun-
ish purposeful misbehavior or to provide an incentive to behave properly. Accord-
ingly, we support the retention of the reasonable cause exception. We do, however,
believe the scope of the exception should be clarified. Hence, TEI believes that opin-
ion standards should be revised for purposes of the reasonable cause exception. Be-
fore relying on an adviser’s opinion to avoid a penalty, the taxpayer must be able
to demonstrate that the opinion is based on the actual facts of the taxpayer’s trans-
action and not an assumed set of facts.
5. Although TEI believes that some adjustment to and harmonization ofs tax-
payer, practitioner, and preparer standards may be appropriate tos encourage the
filing of more accurate returns, we have concerns abouts proposals to raise the
standards, in respect of both shelter and non-s shelter items. Let there be no mis-
take: The multitude of standards nows contained in the Code—more likely than not,
realistic possibility ofs being sustained, substantial authority, reasonable basis, not
frivolous—is undeniably confusing. The multiple standards have reduced tax-
payers,s practitioners, and preparers to assigning mathematical probabilities tos
each standard and then divining (to the extent possible) whether a proposed return
position meets or exceeds the applicable standard. The clarity suggested by the use
of such mathematical probabilities, however, is a false one, for the tax law is
marked by many things, but mathematical precision is rarely one of them.
Regrettably, the false clarity of current law would be exacerbated under the Joint
Committee staff’s proposal to engraft a ‘‘highly confident’’ standard on the Code,
which the staff defines as a 75-percent or greater likelihood of success on the merits
if challenged. At one level, we are concerned that the combination of the ‘‘highly
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00088 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
85
24 It should also be recognized that the person making the decision whether the taxpayer was
‘‘at least probably right’’ or assessing the correctness of the taxpayer’s ‘‘highly confident’’ claim
(i.e., revenue agent, Appeals officer, or court) would not even reach that question until con-
cluding that the taxpayer was wrong on the merits.
confident’’ and ‘‘more likely than not’’ standards may unleash a torrent of disclo-
sures that consumes valuable IRS resources and distracts revenue agents from
issues more worthy of their scrutiny. Equally important, we are concerned the impo-
sition of higher standards will leave taxpayers facing penalties where, several years
after they grappled with the vagaries and interstices of the tax law, a revenue agent
or court concludes—with the benefit of hindsight—that the taxpayer erred in con-
cluding its position was ‘‘at least probably right’’ (under the ‘‘more likely than not
standard’’) or ‘‘highly confident.’’ 24 This concern is especially pronounced in light of
the Joint Committee staff’s recommendation that the reasonable cause exception of
current law be repealed. (See comment 4 above.)
6. Congress should not make changes in this area in a vacuum and should resist
the temptation to make ad hoc changes in the Code’s penalty provisions. A com-
prehensive overhaul of the provisions, as was presaged at yesterday’s hearing of the
Subcommittee on Oversight, is preferable.
VI. STEPS TO ENSURE THAT LEGITIMATE BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS ARE NOT IMPEDED
Mr. Chairman, in announcing this hearing you expressed a desire to explore the
procedures the Administration has in place or could adopt, or that Congress could
enact, to ensure that new or existing enforcement tools brought to bear on corporate
tax shelters do not interfere with legitimate business transactions or make more dif-
ficult the application of an already complex income tax. We agree that this should
be a primary consideration of the Committee. If legislation is enacted that is
overbroad or unclear—if it does an insufficient job of defining what is acceptable
and what is unacceptable—it is the corporate community as a whole that will suffer.
TEI believes that the recommendations contained throughout this testimony ad-
dress this issue, but in summary we offer the following:
• The definition of corporate tax shelter cannot be assumed. It must be known.
Thus, while we agree that there will not be as much ‘‘pressure’’ on the definition
if a disclosure-based proposal is adopted (as opposed to changes to the Code’s sub-
stantive provisions), the problems do not disappear. Unless the ‘‘indicators’’ or ‘‘trig-
gers’’ are objective or relatively easy to apply, there will be a likelihood not only of
massive are objective or disclosures (‘‘just to be safe’’) but of potential abuse by rev-
enue agents or courts using hindsight to impose penalties. Neither of these develop-
ments would be good for tax administration.
• To the extent a broad disclosure regime is adopted, any requirementts agents
for ‘‘early warning’’ disclosure should be imposed on promoters rather than tax-
payers. This would ensure that promoters of tax shelters will have a rather
thanective or incentive not to market abusive transactions, without unduly
burdeninge aather thanective or taxpayers. Taxpayers, however, should be subject
to more meaningful return or disclosure requirements.
• Congress should reject the Siren’s song of senior corporate office attestation. So,
too, should it reject the allure of doubling penalty rates. The IRS and Treasury
would be better advised to develop effective audit strategies and to build the case
for the appropriate assertion of a penalty.
• The standards for taxpayers, preparers, and advisers should be harmonized.
• Last but not least, neither Congress nor the Treasury should shrink from their
obligation to improve and simplify the substantive provisions of the tax law.
VII. CONCLUSION
Mr. Chairman, as evidenced by these comments, there are no magical solutions
to the corporate tax shelter phenomenon. TEI believes the keys are (1) encouraging
clear and meaningful disclosure by tax-shelter promoters and taxpayers; (2) sub-
stantially changing the risk-reward profile for tax-shelter promoters; and (3) clari-
fying that tax ‘‘opinions’’ based on assumed facts and circumstances unrelated to the
taxpayers’ will not be sufficient to excuse taxpayers from disclosure or understate-
ment penalties. Solutions to the tax shelter dilemma must be carefully targeted and
should not exacerbate the problem by adding further complexity to the Internal Rev-
enue Code or by transforming a putatively neutral IRS examination process into an
adversarial—even prosecutorial—search for ‘‘bad actors.’’
Tax Executives Institute appreciates this opportunity to present its views on the
corporate tax shelter problem. Any questions about the Institute’s views should be
directed to either Michael J. Murphy, TEI’s Executive Director, or Timothy J.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00089 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
86
McCormally, the Institute’s General Counsel and Director of Tax Affairs. Both indi-
viduals may be contacted at (202) 638–5601.
Tax Executives Institute, Inc.
CHARLES W. SHEWBRIDGE, III
President
f
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Handler.
STATEMENT OF HAROLD R. HANDLER, CHAIR, TAX SECTION,
NEW YORK STATE BAR ASSOCIATION
Mr. HANDLER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Harold
Handler. I appear in my capacity as chair of the Tax Section of the
New York State Bar Association. Earlier this year we presented
two reports on proposals relating to the phenomenon known as cor-
porate tax shelters. In these reports we indicate our belief that
there are serious and growing problems with aggressive, sophisti-
cated and we believe in some cases artificial transactions designed
particularly to achieve a tax advantage.
The problem with these transactions is twofold. There is, of
course, revenue loss. But there is a second corrosive effect. The con-
stant promotion of these frequently artificial transactions breeds
significant disrespect for the tax system.
We believe there are several related steps in dealing with this
phenomenon. First, the Service must increase its audit efforts and
intensify scrutiny of these transactions, but diligent litigation alone
will not, in our opinion, be sufficient to deter these transactions.
Litigation is expensive, time-consuming and uncertain as to result.
It fails to—and we believe it fails to catch a sufficiently large por-
tion of these transactions to assure adequate deterrence.
There must be further steps taken to change the risk-for-reward
ratio. The only downside risk at present, given the availability of
reasonable cause opinions today which provide protection under the
current law from any penalty, is some additional interest, but the
possibility of benefit by avoiding tax completely is substantial. We
believe this equation must be changed. If a taxpayer is considering
a tax shelter transaction, the elements to be considered must in-
clude the likelihood of significant penalty if the claimed tax treat-
ment is disallowed. Under a strict liability regime, taxpayer’s reli-
ance on professional tax opinion would no longer have the effect of
eliminating the risk of the penalty. Corporate taxpayers would be
forced to assume a real risk in entering into these transactions,
and advisors would be induced to supply balanced and reasoned
analysis rather than merely supplying reasonable cause as under
current law.
There have been a number of proposals recently addressing this
problem which we believe are significant positive steps in the right
direction, and we support these efforts. These include H.R. 2255,
the Treasury White Paper, and the joint Committee study in July.
Of these three approaches to reasonable cause opinions, we prefer
the H.R. 2255 approach, which would prohibit the ability of cor-
porate taxpayers to rely on such opinions. As our reports indicate,
increased disclosure is an essential corollary to any of these in-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00090 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
87
creased penalty provisions, but more than disclosure is required.
We believe it important for Congress to adopt as proposed in H.R.
2255 a strict liability approach to the accuracy-related tax shelter
penalties by eliminating the reasonable cause exception to the im-
position of such penalties for proscribed tax-motivated transactions.
We acknowledge the strict liability approach to accuracy-related
penalties will put considerable pressure on defining appropriate
cases. We have concluded on balance that it is acceptable to live
with the effects of such strict liability when the imposition of the
penalty, one, depends on the taxpayer’s position ultimately not
being sustained as a matter of current law; two, the amount of the
penalty would be reduced if the transaction is properly disclosed;
and three, that the penalties are targeted at corporate tax shelters
as appropriately defined.
The critical element is therefore to define these suspect trans-
actions in a manner that distinguishes artificial transactions de-
signed to produce a tax benefit only from legitimate corporate tax
planning, which we clearly believe is appropriate.
Our report includes a definition of the type of transaction which
we believe should be subject to these penalties. Many of the ele-
ments of our proposal are also contained in H.R. 2255, the ″white
paper,″ and also the Joint Committee Study and we would be
pleased to work with the administration and Congress to clarify
this approach and reconcile any differences.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity of appearing today.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of Harold R. Handler, Chair, Tax Section, New York State Bar
Association
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:
My name is Harold R. Handler and I appear in my capacity as Chair of the Tax
Section of the New York State Bar Association. The Section has 3,000 tax profes-
sionals as members, and through its Executive Committee, prepares and dissemi-
nates between 25 and 40 analytic reports a year on various topics relating to Fed-
eral, state and local taxation.
Earlier this year, we presented two reports on proposals in the President’s Fiscal
Year 2000 Budget Proposals relating to the phenomenon known as corporate tax
shelters. In these reports, we indicate our belief that there are serious, and growing,
problems with aggressive, sophisticated and, we believe in some cases, artificial
transactions designed principally to achieve a particular tax advantage. A good ex-
ample is the transaction recently the subject of a Tax Court, and a Third Circuit
decision in ACM Partnership vs. Commissioner. But this is not the only example,
and our report attempts to detail a number of abusive corporate tax shelter trans-
actions.
Tax shelter transactions take many complex forms, but typically include some if
not all of the following elements: lack of business purpose other than tax reduction,
absence of meaningful economic risk or reward, exploitation of uneconomic aspects
of the tax code, and shifting of income to tax-exempt parties. Consider, for example,
the ‘‘lease-in lease-out’’ (or ‘‘LILO’’) transaction described in a revenue ruling issued
last spring (Rev. Rul. 99–14, 1999–13 I.R.B. 3). A US taxpayer purports to ‘‘lease’’
an asset (perhaps a town hall or a trolley system) from a foreign municipality, and
to ‘‘sublease’’ the asset back to the municipality. The US taxpayer ‘‘prepays’’ and de-
ducts the ‘‘rent’’ under its lease, funded by a non-recourse loan which is
collateralized by the municipality depositing this prepayment with the lending bank
to secure its obligation to make ‘‘sublease rent’’ payments over a term of years. The
transaction serves no discernable business purpose, involves no meaningful risk to
either party because of the circular flow of cash, and is intended to exploit uneco-
nomic differences in accounting for the ‘‘lease’’ and the ‘‘sublease’’ so as to create
‘‘income’’ to the tax-exempt municipality and deductions for the US taxpayer during
the initial part of the transaction.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00091 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
88
Some might suggest that all is well now that the particular accounting rules that
the taxpayer sought to exploit in the LILO transaction described in the Revenue
Ruling have been changed by the promulgation this spring of final regulations
under Section 467 of the Code. There are rumors abroad, however, of ‘‘son of LILO’’
transactions. Whether or not these particular rumors are true, it is undoubtedly the
case that misguided creativity is being applied to concoct other tax avoidance trans-
actions that have as little substance as the LILO transaction that the Ruling de-
scribes.
The problem with these transactions is two-fold. There is obviously an effect on
revenue. While we are unable to estimate the amount of this revenue loss, anecdotal
evidence and personal experience leads us to believe it is likely quite significant.
But there is a second corrosive effect. The constant promotion of these frequently
artificial transactions breeds significant disrespect for the tax system, encouraging
responsible corporate taxpayers to expect this type of activity to be the norm, and
to follow the lead of other taxpayers who have engaged in tax advantaged trans-
actions.
There are no simple solutions to the problems posed by the corporate tax shelter
phenomenon. We believe there are several related steps to dealing with this phe-
nomenon. First, the Service must increase its audit efforts and intensify the scru-
tiny of these transactions. As an example, the recent government success in ACM
and similar cases is a positive development. But audit scrutiny and diligent litiga-
tion alone will not, in our opinion, be sufficient to deter these transactions. In the
first place, litigation is expensive, time consuming, and uncertain as to result. More-
over, we are convinced that it fails to catch a sufficiently large enough portion of
these transactions to assure adequate deterrence.
There must be further steps taken to change the risk/reward ratio. The current
equation is all too simple. Even responsible corporate financial officers, when faced
with the choice of paying tax on some item of gain or other income may choose to
engage in artificial transactions designed to eliminate the tax they otherwise would
pay. The only downside risk at present, given the availability of ‘‘reasonable cause’’
opinions today, which provide protection under current law from any penalty, is
some additional interest, which is likely to be at a somewhat higher rate than they
would otherwise pay from more conventional lending sources. But the possibility for
benefit by avoiding the tax completely is substantial, and far greater than the risk
of somewhat greater interest cost.
We believe this equation must be changed. If a taxpayer is considering a tax-shel-
ter transaction, the elements to be considered must include the likelihood of a sig-
nificant penalty if the claimed tax treatment is disallowed. Under a strict-liability
regime, a taxpayer’s reliance on professional tax opinions would no longer have the
effect of eliminating the risk of a penalty being imposed on corporate taxpayers en-
gaging in corporate tax shelter transactions. Consequently, corporate taxpayers
would be forced to assume a real risk in entering into these transactions, and advis-
ers would be induced to supply balanced and reasoned analysis rather than sup-
plying ‘‘reasonable cause’’ as under current law.
In our view, even if substantially greater resources were devoted to attacking cor-
porate tax shelters under current law, the structure of our current penalty system
ultimately would not provide adequate deterrence of corporate tax shelter activity.
For this reason, we strongly support the approach of the Administration’s proposal
to increase accuracy-related penalties for defined corporate tax shelter transactions
to encourage disclosure and deter risk taking by taxpayers. There have been a num-
ber of proposals recently addressing this problem, which we believe are significant
positive steps in the right direction, and we support these efforts. H.R.2255 proposes
a statutory definition of ‘‘non-economic tax attributes,’’ which uses many of the same
attributes that were included in our proposed definition in our April Report and
eliminates the ability to rely on a ‘‘reasonable cause’’ opinion. The Treasury ‘‘white
paper’’ in July proposed imposing additional penalties unless there was disclosure
as well as a ‘‘strong’’ opinion supporting the validity of the transaction, The Joint
Committee study in July also proposed a definition of tax shelter, and would provide
a ‘‘reasonable cause’’ abatement of penalty only with disclosure coupled with an
opinion concluding a 75% likelihood of success, but also proposed to expand the ‘‘aid-
ing and abetting’’ penalty to the issuer of such a 75% likelihood opinion if a ‘‘reason-
able tax practitioner’’ would not have issued such an opinion. Of these three ap-
proaches to ‘‘reasonable cause’’ opinions, we prefer the H.R.2255 approach which
would prohibit the ability of corporate taxpayers to rely on such opinions.
As our Reports indicate, increased disclosure is an essential corollary to any of
these increased penalty provisions. Disclosure will be helpful on several counts.
First, proper disclosure will change the odds of the audit lottery, and the need to
disclose will itself act as a deterrent. In addition, to the extent taxpayers actually
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00092 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
89
report, a disclosure regime will act as an early warning system to allow the Treas-
ury and the Service to respond quickly to new developments on this front.
But more than disclosure is required. As we have noted, to address the insuffi-
cient deterrent effect of current law, we believe it important for Congress to adopt,
as proposed in H.R.2255, a ‘‘strict liability’’ approach to the accuracy-related tax-
shelter penalties by eliminating the reasonable cause exception to the imposition of
the accuracy-related penalties for prescribed tax-motivated transactions.
We acknowledge a strict-liability approach to accuracy-related penalties will put
considerable pressure on defining appropriate cases subject to the provision, and
may increase significantly the leverage of Internal Revenue Service agents in some
audits of corporate taxpayers. Because we believe it crucial to increase the risk asso-
ciated with entering into corporate tax shelters, we have concluded that, on balance,
it is acceptable to live with these effects of H.R.2255 when the imposition of the pen-
alty (i) depends on the taxpayer’s position ultimately not being sustained as a mat-
ter of current law, (ii) the amount of the penalty is reduced if the transaction is dis-
closed on the taxpayer’s return, and (iii) the penalties are targeted at corporate tax
shelters, as appropriately defined.
The critical element is therefore to define these suspect transactions in a manner
that distinguishes artificial transactions designed to produce a tax benefit only, from
legitimate corporate tax planning which we believe is clearly appropriate. Our re-
port includes a definition of the type of transaction we believe should be subject to
these penalties. Many of the elements of our proposal are also contained in
H.R.2255 and we would be pleased to work with the Administration and Congress
to clarify this approach and reconcile any differences.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee
today. I will be pleased to answer your questions.
f
Chairman ARCHER. The Chair is grateful to all four of you for
taking your time to come help us try to work our way through this
very complicated process, and each one of you has an expertise
from your own personal activities that can be very helpful to the
Committee as we try to resolve this issue in the right way. So we
do look forward to having your help as we work through this.
There are many, many questions that I guess can be asked and
I will try to break the ice a little bit. And I am sure other members
will want to add to that. I think all of us should agree with the
basic foundation that we want to get at abusers and we don’t want
to get at people who are legitimate. How do we finally accomplish
that?
Mr. Shewbridge, there was an allusion by some witnesses that
the corporate tax base has been eroded by corporate tax shelters.
And I am curious: Has the corporate tax base been eroded? What
are the tax revenues coming from corporations in the aggregate
today as compared to 5 years ago, for example, or 10 years ago?
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. I really don’t know what the absolute dollar
amounts are. I have not seen any empirical data that suggests that
corporate tax shelters are eroding the tax base. I did hear Ms.
Paull’s comments earlier on the Joint Committee’s efforts to quan-
tify how much certain transactions might involve after they worked
their way through the legal system, but I cannot speak to their cor-
rectness.
Chairman ARCHER. Well, I should have directed this question to
Mr. Talisman, and I overlooked doing that. But the Committee
does need to have information as to what has actually happened
to the revenues from corporations in the last 5 to 10 years.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00093 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
90
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. That has been one of our concerns. There real-
ly has not been any empirical data with respect to what is hap-
pening with respect to corporate tax shelters.
Chairman ARCHER. The preliminarily ad hoc information that I
have as corporate tax revenues have gone up—and maybe other
witnesses who will come before us today can testify to that.
I will ask you one other additional question. As a financial officer
of a corporation, are you not under a fiduciary responsibility to
keep your taxes as low as possible, as are legitimately related to
your business transactions?
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. Yes, I think I would say I am under require-
ment to pay only those taxes that I am absolutely required to
under the law. And I think we do that to the best of our ability.
Chairman ARCHER. I hope we don’t ignore that fiduciary respon-
sibility as we go through this process, because taxes are a cost of
doing business.
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. Absolutely.
Chairman ARCHER. And legitimate operations can design their
transactions in a way to keep their taxes as low as possible and/
or under a fiduciary responsibility to do that, are they not?
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. Yes, sir, they are. And I make no excuse for
doing so.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Handler, I have got a couple more ques-
tions. In your opinion, will there be more or less litigation if this
Doggett bill is enacted compared to current law?
Mr. HANDLER. I think as I say in my formal testimony with re-
spect to the strict liability approach, that I think the Doggett bill
proposes and that we endorse, I think there will be less litigation;
and I think there will be less litigation because I think our cor-
porate financial officers, such as Mr. Shewbridge, will know that
the risk of entering any of these transactions will create a far
greater penalty in terms of loss than the benefit that would be ulti-
mately sustained by success. That would, I think, eliminate the fre-
quency of these transactions, and I would hope eliminate litigation.
Chairman ARCHER. I assume, as both you and Mr. Sax will be
retained by a number of people to advise them as to how to work
their way through this process irrespective of what the legislative
result is, and I don’t want to imply that you may get more business
because people will come to you and say, how in the world do we
deal with all of these new vague tests and all of these very new
reporting requirements and how can we be sure that we are safe
and how can we know that we are not going to get into the penalty
situation?
And I will put that aside for the moment as any possible special
interest that you might have. But you certainly will be asked by
your clients to defend them in the event that the IRS comes after
them.
Mr. HANDLER. Absolutely.
Chairman ARCHER. That is your appropriate role, both you and
Mr. Sax in our system. How would you argue on behalf of your cli-
ent as to the definition of ″substantial″?
Mr. HANDLER. Well, that is obviously a relative term, and the
litigation is only one aspect of the nature of the work that we do
in New York and Mr. Sax and the ABA does nationwide. We rep-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00094 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
91
resent—our organization has 3,000 tax professionals, and what is
remarkable about the testimony that I have heard both here and
at the Senate Finance Committee is that the professionals, the tax
professionals, are cautioning Congress in the fact that they want
more limitation imposed on the ability to deliver the kinds of opin-
ions that are now being delivered.
I think we both are moving in that direction in different ways.
That is one major element of what we as tax professionals do for
a living. And what we are asking Congress to do is to give us some
additional support in carefully analyzing transactions and describ-
ing the risks that are available to our corporate taxpaying clients.
At the moment, as I said in my testimony, the risk at the moment
is merely just additional interest, if the taxpayer loses and we have
to advise the taxpayer of that, and when it comes time to litigation,
the issue of substantial versus nonsubstantial is a function of the
question of substantive law that might exist at that moment.
But what is remarkable is that our group and, I believe, Mr.
Sax’s group are basically asking for a further limitation on the kind
of opinions that we would be asked, we are being asked to deliver
today.
Chairman ARCHER. Well, is substantive law adequately specific
to where you know what the term ‘‘substantial’’ means, or would
you perhaps take a different position from the IRS?
Mr. HANDLER. Our view is that we don’t——
Chairman ARCHER. Defending one of your clients.
Mr. HANDLER. I am sorry I thought you meant in terms of the
litigation.
Chairman ARCHER. You won’t defend the IRS, I don’t think.
Mr. HANDLER. I am on the other sides of those issues.
Chairman ARCHER. Your involvement will be on behalf of the pri-
vate client that is being contested by the IRS.
Mr. HANDLER. And I would argue——
Chairman ARCHER. How would you define on behalf of your cli-
ent the term ″substantial″?
Mr. HANDLER. I would marshal all of the information that exists
with respect to the transaction and try to demonstrate that the
benefit that was achieved by the client as a business matter was
substantial.
Chairman ARCHER. And is it possible the IRS would take a dif-
ferent position?
Mr. HANDLER. Yes, it is very possible, and that is what courts
are for. The court would ultimately decide whether or not—which
of us was right in that dispute.
Chairman ARCHER. Is it a precise term, or is it something that
is going to always be left to the courts to make the subjective deci-
sion in every instance?
Mr. HANDLER. I don’t think you can define ″substantial″ with
precision. I think it has to be something which is the subject of ul-
timate dispute resolution.
Chairman ARCHER. That is the point I wanted to get at. Your job
as shepherds and stewards of the Tax Code is to try to make it as
specific as possible so that there will be a degree of certainty for
the people in this country to know what they can and cannot do.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00095 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
92
And I am a little bit concerned about what you have just told me
compared to what your general testimony to this Committee was
that you strongly support this. Because it will create clearly from
your final answer a very nonspecific provision in the Code, which
we already have tremendous problems with the IRS and the imple-
mentation of our system in these gray areas.
We find that our tax system in many instances is not determined
by the law, but determined by the ability to negotiate. That is a
bad tax system. No one taxpayer, because they have a better ability
to negotiate with the IRS, should get a better result than another
taxpayer in the very same situation. And now you are telling us
this is an uncertain term, and there will be different results. That
bothers me as someone who is trying to make the tax system more
specific.
Now, let me ask Mr. Lifson. My colleague and friend, Mr.
Doggett—and we are friends, we can disagree without losing our
friendship——
Mr. LIFSON. Been there.
Chairman ARCHER. —and we do disagree significantly on a lot of
issues—has said and has repeated today that people within your
industry, and I suppose also, Mr. Sax, people within your profes-
sion, are sleazy, are underhanded, are hustlers. Do you know those
people?
Mr. LIFSON. I suspect I do.
Chairman ARCHER. I don’t think he is referring to anybody else.
I think he is referring to consultants in either the CPA profession
or the legal profession. And I am just curious if you know any of
them.
Mr. LIFSON. Well, I am not sure I would use those words to de-
scribe them, but I could see why some people might use them. I
don’t have any as close associates, but I read about them the same
way Mr. Doggett does.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Sax.
Mr. SAX. We have chosen quite deliberately not to employ those
words in our descriptions.
Chairman ARCHER. So you don’t know of any people in your pro-
fession that fit that description?
Mr. SAX. I wouldn’t go so far as to say that, no.
Chairman ARCHER. Well, what percent would you say there are?
Mr. SAX. I would be pleased to respond to that. I am pleased to
say that I believe it is very, very, very low, much lower than in the
general population.
Chairman ARCHER. Oh, okay; 1 percent maybe?
Mr. SAX. I mean, I don’t have statistical data, Mr. Chairman, of
course, but I do——
Chairman ARCHER. Less than 10 percent?
Mr. SAX. I do take great pride in being a member of the bar. I
take that honor and role as an officer of the court seriously. I be-
lieve on the whole, lawyers are very good people and try to take
their mission seriously and do the right thing. And, yes, as with
the general population and every other population, there will be
bad apples.
Chairman ARCHER. Okay. I happen to be a lawyer myself, and
I don’t think it is a dishonorable profession. I agree with you, it is
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00096 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
93
an honorable profession; sometimes dishonored by some of our own
members of the profession, but in itself an honorable profession.
Why is it that the Bar Association, if it knows about sleazy, under-
handed hustlers doesn’t disbar them and solve the problem?
Mr. SAX. That is a very good question, Mr. Chairman. I think it
arises principally from the fact that the organized bar is not very
organized. It is balkanized into the bars of 50 States, often under-
funded, often with very little by way of resources and very little
ability to detect, much less punish the things that should be de-
tected and punished.
Chairman ARCHER. Well, maybe we ought to try, you and I to-
gether ought to try shore up our association and see that it does
a better job.
Mr. Lifson, what about the CPAs?
Mr. LIFSON. I think the road from accusation to conviction is a
very long road indeed in all professions. And I do know that the
AICPA is investigating and is continuously investigating various
acts of bad behavior, including involvement with tax shelters. And
it will continue to do so.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Doggett said in his testimony that one of
your members, one of the Big 5, according to his testimony, re-
quires its very smart staffers to come up with at least one economi-
cally stupid, but taxwise corporate tax dodge idea per week. Which
one would that be?
Mr. LIFSON. I am not exactly sure, since I come here rep-
resenting 40,000 practice units and 330,000 CPAs. So if one of
those 40,000 practice units in fact does do that, then that would
be something or that would be a matter for study. But I have a
feeling that is a matter of characterization of activity rather than
reality in the way that activities really work in that firm or any
other firm.
Chairman ARCHER. Okay. Let me go back over what he said; he
did not say one of the 40,000, he said one of the Big 5. Which one
would that be?
Mr. LIFSON. I can’t say for sure. I don’t know.
Chairman ARCHER. Okay. Do you have any sort of intimation as
to which one it might be?
Mr. LIFSON. I don’t know.
Chairman ARCHER. And if so, would your association be willing
to take action against them?
Mr. LIFSON. If, in fact, anybody had those sort of policies, one
would first have to determine whether that was a person’s policy
or a firm’s policy. I am sure that this is a much more complicated
issue than the surface of the headline or the surface of an accusa-
tion.
Chairman ARCHER. Do you believe that is possible? I mean, this
is just an allegation obviously, but do you believe it is possible?
Mr. LIFSON. I am a very open-minded person, I believe anything
is possible.
Chairman ARCHER. Okay, I thank the gentleman for enduring
my questioning.
Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00097 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
94
Mr. Shewbridge, it is my understanding from your testimony
that while we might have a different perspective on what belongs
in legislation to address this problem, that you agree that the Con-
gress should take legislative steps to address this problem; is that
correct?
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. Well, I really think it is a little bit broader
than that. Some action in legislation may be needed, but it needs
to be done in concert with additional enforcement, effective use of
the tools that are already available to the IRS, and more faster
guidance from the Treasury Department.
Mr. DOGGETT. I thank you for that.
And, Mr. Lifson, I understand the same to be true with reference
to your testimony. You think it would be a mistake for this Con-
gress not to act legislatively to address this problem, though you
have a different view than I do about what the most appropriate
legislative action is?
Mr. LIFSON. I think it would be fair to say we do not think it
would be inappropriate to act.
Mr. DOGGETT. Do you think that the Congress needs to address
this problem legislatively or not?
Mr. LIFSON. I believe in many respects the problem may well,
through publicity and enhanced enforcement, solve itself; but the
speed with which the problem may be solved may be of concern to
this Congress.
Mr. DOGGETT. Giving the brevity of the questioning period I
have, I would ask if you would submit to the Committee if you are
aware of your association having ever disciplined or removed or
barred any member or any individual accountant for peddling any
type of corporate tax shelter. With reference to your comment that
no one likes to see the tax system scammed, I agree with you, and
certainly some of the tax shelters that you know have subsequently
been outlawed were scamming the system, weren’t they?
[The information follows:]
February 15, 2000
The Honorable Lloyd Doggett
328 Cannon Office Building
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515
Dear Congressman Doggett:
This letter responds to your request at the House Ways and Means Committee
hearings on November 10, 1999 for information about AICPA sanctions against
members involved in ‘‘corporate tax shelters.’’ As we stated at the hearings, we are
determined to maintain the highest ethical standards for our members, and the
AICPA and the state CPA societies participating in the Joint Ethics Enforcement
Program are committed to protecting the public interest. The AICPA supports ef-
forts to curtail ‘‘abusive tax shelters,’’ and our only concern about legislation in this
area is that it be carefully crafted to avoid both burdensome disclosure requirements
and harsh penalties for average taxpayers with normal transactions.
Our Professional Ethics Division investigates each allegation of unprofessional or
unethical conduct by an AICPA member that is brought to its attention by another
AICPA member, a state CPA society, a client, a member of the public, or any other
source. We are proactive in obtaining such information, and monitor media reports,
including local and national newspapers, professional publications, and government
reports. Many of our investigations are based on referrals received from government
agencies, and we review the IRS Internal Revenue Bulletin for sanctions imposed
by the IRS Director of Practice. We encourage IRS and other government officials
to report individuals involved in abusive conduct to help us maintain the high
standards of our profession.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00098 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
95
All sanctions involving suspension or expulsion from membership, and guilty find-
ings of the Joint Trial Board are published in The CPA Letter which is broadly dis-
tributed, including to all 338,000 AICPA members, state CPA licensing boards, var-
ious government agencies, various trade and consumer publications, and others. We
are also in the process of providing this information on the AICPA’s website. In ad-
dition to affecting the reputation of the CPA involved, distribution to state licensing
boards could potentially result in the loss of his or her license to practice. We take
these matters very seriously, as do our members.
During the five-year period from 1994 through 1998, we investigated approxi-
mately 1,720 members, resulting in 258 being either suspended or expelled; 391
being given letters of required corrective action; and 60 being disciplined by the
Joint Trial Board. While these cases include members who have an alleged involve-
ment with a tax scam or fraud, we are not able to tell you specifically how many
of these are related to ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ issues. The AICPA Professional Ethics
Division is developing a new database that will be able to capture the type of infor-
mation you have requested in the future, but our present system is over ten years
old and does not allow us to search in the way you have requested. Also, the term
‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ has yet to be well-defined, and has only been used in the
sense that you have used it since the end of 1998. The statistics for 1999 have not
yet been compiled, but they will be derived from the present database system.
I hope this information is helpful, and would be happy to provide any follow-up
information.
Sincerely,
DAVID A. LIFSON
Chair
AICPA Tax Executive Committee
f
Mr. LIFSON. I am not sure what the definition of a tax shelter
is, but there certainly are some arrangements.
Mr. DOGGETT. How about the renting of Swiss Town Hall and
renting it right back; wasn’t that scamming the system?
Mr. LIFSON. Yes, it is, but I just am not sure about what a tax
shelter is.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you.
Mr. Handler, isn’t the calculation that is contemplated in the HR
2255, as I proposed it, essentially the same calculation that a cor-
poration that you might represent would have to make in deciding
whether to buy one of these tax shelter products that some hustler
calls them with a cold call and says they ought to undertake?
Mr. HANDLER. I am not sure I understand what you mean by
″calculation,″ Congressman, but——
Mr. DOGGETT. In deciding whether the tax shelter product is
worth getting, whether it exposes them to too much risk, whether
they will have any real gain or whether they will have tremendous
tax advantages with no real risk.
Mr. HANDLER. I think the typical analysis that is done, appro-
priately done, in making corporate decisions of these types, is what
is a risk-reward analysis; what do I gain by taking—by doing a
transaction, what do I risk by doing it?
Mr. DOGGETT. Isn’t that essentially what the economic substance
test calls for?
Mr. HANDLER. Yes.
Mr. DOGGETT. It is a little more complicated than that, I know.
Mr. HANDLER. It is a quite a bit more complicated, but it is basi-
cally the same series of equations in terms of deciding whether it
is a worthwhile transaction to undertake.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00099 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
96
Mr. DOGGETT. Do I understand your testimony to be that there
is a limit, as important as it is to have precision in the Code so
you can advise your client what the law is, there is some limit as
to how far that precision can go and it is necessary to have certain
terms like ″substantial″ and ″meaningful,″ and this is not the only
part of the Internal Revenue Code where we find them, isn’t it?
Mr. HANDLER. That is true.
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Sax, I want to commend you and Mr. Handler.
I think your statement is to be praised, not only for its succinct elo-
quence, but for the fact it takes a certain amount of courage for you
and Mr. Handler and other members of the bar to come to this
Committee. After all, the same corporations that are being tempted
with these cold calls and these tax hustlers are the same people
that are the clients of many of your members. And I think it does
take courage to come forward and speak out about the need to re-
solve this issue.
Now, I know you might not use the same terminology that I do
about this. But when you see the cover of Forbes Magazine about
tax shelter hustlers, and you hear about these problems from the
20,000 members of your profession, are there good people in some
cases doing bad things because of the pressure of tax hustlers? And
in addition, let me just ask you to respond to the point in my testi-
mony earlier that I had a multinational major Texas company come
and tell me that their tax department was getting about one cold
call a day with some tax shelter proposal.
Does that fit with what you have been hearing about this prob-
lem?
Mr. SAX. Yes, it does, Congressman. We do agree that we are
confronting a situation of good people doing bad things. We have
tried to address that portion of the issue that we can directly deal
with within the bar, by proposing the amendment to Circular 230
to upgrade the quality of tax opinion-giving, figuring that is one
thing we can do immediately, and we have sought to do that.
Mr. DOGGETT. But that by itself won’t get the job done, as your
testimony indicates?
Mr. SAX. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. Could you just—we have all talked—I have used
the Swiss Town Hall example. But can you give us an example that
won’t cause our eyes to glaze over, of what some of these corporate
tax shelters that you are hearing about, what they basically in-
volve?
Mr. SAX. There is a side of me that says I can’t give you an ex-
ample that won’t cause your eyes——
Mr. DOGGETT. That is part of the problem, isn’t it? They are so
complex no one can understand them.
Mr. SAX. One of the common denominators is complexity used to
obfuscate.
Mr. DOGGETT. Exactly.
Mr. SAX. You often hear it said that no agent can ever under-
stand or unravel this. So one of the predicates is the complexity
that makes it almost impossible for me to give you a short descrip-
tion of one. One fundamental concept is to bring a built-in loss in
from offshore and marry it up with a gain that is about to happen
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00100 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
97
onshore, using either a partnership or corporation to mix the two
up.
Now, that is not done in a few words, that is done in several
hundred pages of documents. That is the gist of one type.
Mr. DOGGETT. By offshore, you mean some foreign entity that is
not subject to United States taxation, they get the gain or the in-
come, but the loss is here to be a benefit to someone who is a U.S.
taxpayer?
Mr. SAX. That’s correct, Congressman. And the fundamental of
that is to take a transaction that has a gain side and a loss side
and put the gain side in a place that doesn’t pay tax, whether it
is a domestic nontaxpayer, a domestic taxpayer with offsetting
losses or a foreign taxpayer, and put the loss side in the hands of
someone who will use it to reduce taxes in this country.
Mr. DOGGETT. I thank all four of you.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. McCrery.
Mr. MCCRERY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, I appreciate the testimony that all of you have pro-
vided. And I have heard from others before the Committee today
that basically while there are tools that the IRS has to use today
to combat illegal tax shelters, you think that there is more that is
needed legislatively to give the IRS or the government better tools
to fight this kind of activity.
And I am not sure how much further we need to go to give more
tools to the government. But assuming that we do need to give
more tools, do any of you see a danger in going too far the other
way, in terms of inhibiting legitimate economic activity? I know
you are not economists, but you have some familiarity with what
we are talking about. Do any of you have any fears of that?
Mr. SAX. Congressman, I can respond to that by saying that we
are very concerned about inhibiting legitimate business activity,
and it is for that reason that we have confined the essence of our
proposal to disclosure, figuring that if the worst thing that can
happen is that facts have to be disclosed by the taxpayer, that is
not too terrible. That is an acceptable burden to place on taxpayers
who come close to the line.
Mr. LIFSON. I think that my statement emphasizes the impor-
tance, not of law enforcement, but of self-assessment. And by mak-
ing large gray areas, areas that responsible corporate officers must
disclose, a responsible corporate officer knows the difference be-
tween a business start-up that produces losses and a tax shelter.
They know what they have been working with and how they have
worked and generated those numbers. So by having that gray area
simply disclosed with higher standards and so on, you create a self-
policing system.
Mr. MCCRERY. Mr. Shewbridge, how do you respond to that?
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. I don’t disagree at all with the disclosure pro-
posals. The books and records of corporate taxpayers, and their tax
returns are open, and I don’t think they mind disclosing.
I would say, though, that with respect to corporate tax shelters,
the only way that we can disclose is to know what the animal is.
We need a very clear, concise definition of what a corporate tax
shelter is in order to know what to disclose. Also, we think that the
promoters ought to be disclosing.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00101 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
98
Mr. MCCRERY. Mr. Handler.
Mr. HANDLER. Mr. McCrery, in the report I referred to in my tes-
timony, we have a great concern about legitimate corporate trans-
actions being subject to this kind of legislation. And in fact one of
the things we comment on in our report is that we do not agree
with what has been called by Mr. Lifson and others as super 269
provisions or new substantive rules that would potentially attract
corporate transactions. We believe, as others on this panel do, that
disclosure is one element; but we also believe, as I said earlier, that
the reasonable cause opinion which does not allow for significant
risks to a corporate taxpayer who wishes to undertake one of these
transactions has got to be strengthened.
Mr. MCCRERY. In 1997, the Congress enhanced the substantial
understatement penalty related to corporate tax shelters. Given the
standard lag in the audit cycle, should we wait to assess the impact
of that change in the law on this kind of activity, or do you think
it is going to have any substantial impact?
Mr. SHEWBRIDGE. I think you are seeing some activity in that
right now, with many recent court decisions. Taxpayers are cer-
tainly going to be looking at those cases and making decisions as
to what risks they want to take going forward. So, yes, I think a
waiting period is probably in order.
Mr. MCCRERY. Anybody else?
Mr. HANDLER. As Ms. Paull said earlier in the earlier panel, one
of the problems with the existing understatement penalty is the
ability to avoid it. And it is relatively easy to avoid in today’s world
by reason of the kinds of opinions I have discussed. I think it would
be appropriate for Congress to consider that element of the under-
statement regime.
Mr. MCCRERY. And one last question, especially for you, Mr.
Handler, in your testimony, you say that you favor increasing pen-
alties on taxpayers that are engaging in corporate tax shelters.
Would you also favor increasing penalties on advisers who issue
opinions to corporate tax shelters, to corporate tax executives on
tax shelters?
Mr. HANDLER. At the risk of sounding self-serving, our view is
that the proper party to whom these penalties should apply is the
taxpayer undertaking them. In my experience, with the members
of my group, and we represent, remember, 3,000 professionals, the
issue of proper analysis and the kinds of risks that are associated
with these transactions is a function of what the law requires.
At the moment, the law only requires a more likely than not
opinion, which, because of the ambiguity of some provisions in the
laws, is a relatively easy standard to satisfy. That is why we pro-
posed strict liability and allow professionals like myself to advise
clients that there is a risk of penalty in transactions where a prop-
erly-defined tax shelter might fit this particular transaction.
Mr. MCCRERY. I want to thank you. I am a lawyer, too. And I
appreciate Mr. Sax defending our profession. I know a lot of law-
yers and I know some of them who are good and some of them who
are bad. I know a lot of doctors, some of them are good and some
are bad. I know a lot of lobbyists, most of them are good.
But, you know, I am tired of this name calling and trying to clas-
sify people according to their profession or according to somebody’s
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00102 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
99
perception of them. I wish we would get away from that. There are
good people and bad people in all professions and I think generally
about the same percentage in all the professions are good and bad.
And we ought to just accept that and move on.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Chairman ARCHER. Would my friend from Louisiana include
Members of Congress in that?
Mr. MCCRERY. Yes, sir.
Chairman ARCHER. Gentlemen, I would like to follow up for just
a moment, if I may, because we do want to work through this and
we do want to find the right answer. I myself believe it is impor-
tant that we have as much specificity as possible in the standard
that we ultimately enact.
And I am very, very concerned about that. But this entire con-
cept is promoted, in a sense, by allusion to promoters and those
who call you on the phone, those who come to your office, those
who are going to charge you a fee because they have got a tax shel-
ter plan and they are going to urge you to adopt it. And clearly,
I don’t think any of us are sympathetic to that.
And if there is a way to ferret that out and address that, then
that is something we ought to try to pursue, if possible. But as I
read this bill, it goes far beyond that. I mean, the promotion of the
bill is on the basis that there are outside promoters coming in and
that they are—they are literally prospering on the tax system by
getting good people to do wrong.
But the reality of this bill is, it is far, far more than that. It is
anybody who undertakes any deduction, any deduction, any tax
credit, internally generated, because you are under the fiduciary
responsibility to reduce your tax burden legally as much as you can
as a cost of doing business. It hits you, not just the promoters, not
just people who come in from the outside.
And I am concerned about that, particularly when there is not
a specificity as to standard, because I think it gets over into every-
thing, it gets over into your borrowing, it gets over into the under-
writing of new stock issues, the investment brokerage houses.
Every aspect that has any relationship to the Tax Code is covered
by this in a very broad sweeping way. And so we need your help
to help us work through this and to get to the right answer.
I am curious before you leave, I would like to know what each
of you feels—we have listened to you and I think we have an un-
derstanding of where you are. But what I want to hear is whether
any one of you endorses H.R. 2255, the Doggett bill that we are
having a hearing on today.
Does any one of you endorse that bill and that approach specifi-
cally to the problem?
Mr. HANDLER. Mr. Chairman, as I indicate in my testimony, our
group endorses the repeal of the reasonable cause exception to the
understatement penalty. And that is a key provision of the Doggett
bill.
Chairman ARCHER. But it goes far beyond that.
Mr. HANDLER. I agree it goes far beyond it.
Chairman ARCHER. So the record should show that there is not
a one of you that endorses the complete H.R. 2255?
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00103 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
100
Mr. SAX. That is true, Mr. Chairman, but the disclosure provi-
sions of H.R. 2255 and our disclosure provisions are for all practical
purposes the same, so we very much endorse and embrace the dis-
closure provisions of that section of the bill.
Chairman ARCHER. But let me reiterate, this bill goes far beyond
the provision that you endorse and the provision that Mr. Handler
endorses, so if the Committee’s decision must be to embrace this
bill or to embrace nothing, what would be your position in its en-
tirety now? You know, I don’t mean to pick and choose one section.
You say, okay, I agree with this section, you have got to look at
the bill in its entirety.
Mr. HANDLER. May I speak to that for a second?
Chairman ARCHER. Yes, please, sir.
Mr. HANDLER. Someone earlier at one of the—perhaps it was
yourself indicated there are many approaches to this issue and
many ways of getting at a solution to these problems. Provisions
in the Doggett bill, including the definition of a noneconomic at-
tribute, pick up and include a number of items that we would in-
clude in a different form of approach to the problem in trying to
define transactions that would be subject to a nonstrict liability
penalty.
In that respect, I think that the Doggett bill is absolutely correct.
It has picked up a number of the attributes of the tax shelter pro-
posals that are floating around, not all of them, but many of them,
the taxing different party issues and the other aspects, which I be-
lieve and our group believes should be included in an appropriate
definition of a tax shelter to which strict liability would apply.
Now, that is not the same approach as Congressman Doggett’s
approach. We do not agree with a substantive provision that is like
a 216 or a super 269, which is akin to what Congressman Doggett
approach would provide. But that doesn’t mean that we disagree
with the elements of the Congressman’s proposal.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you for explaining that.
Mr. Doggett, do you want to follow up?
Mr. DOGGETT. Since my name is invoked, I do want to follow up
just a little bit.
Mr. Sax, let me begin with you. I believe you made clear that as
far as this bill, which only has about 4 or 5 sections, section 4 on
disclosure, you believe follows almost verbatim the recommenda-
tions that the ABA has made?
Mr. SAX. That is correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. With reference to section 3, while I understand
you don’t embrace section 3 as it is written today, the idea of hav-
ing the courts rely on a codified economic substance rule, which
your section has not yet proposed with specificity, but that idea is
something that we share in common with reference to section 3, is
it not?
Mr. SAX. There is a commonality.
Mr. DOGGETT. And there is a difference?
Mr. SAX. And there is a difference. We propose that where the
courts choose to apply to the economic substance doctrine there be
a weighing of tax and nontax benefits. I might note that we don’t
view that as complicating matters. As the economic substance doc-
trine stands, there is no standard whatever and it is very com-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00104 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
101
plicated because there is simply no guidance. Adding the word
‘‘substantial’’ is imperfect but it is better than nothing at all, and
certainly clearer.
Mr. DOGGETT. If the word ‘‘substantial’’ is used in the right way,
it adds more clarification than our current law has?
Mr. SAX. That is our position.
Mr. DOGGETT. And Mr. Handler, I believe the New York State
Bar Association disclosure provisions are somewhat different than
the American Bar Association’s disclosure requirements, is there
some variation?
Mr. HANDLER. We are very close.
Mr. DOGGETT. Very close. So as to the disclosure requirements
and the provisions concerning the reliance on what is called the
‘‘excuse letter,’’ you are in agreement with the bill?
Mr. HANDLER. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. DOGGETT. And is your position somewhat similar to Mr.
Sax’s with reference to the use of the economic substance test; you
believe that the Congress should codify it, but you would do that
in a somewhat different way than I have done in section 3?
Mr. HANDLER. That is correct.
Mr. DOGGETT. And generally the findings and purpose clause,
which is section 2, it seems to me to read pretty close to some of
the testimony as you have given here.
Mr. HANDLER. That is correct, Congressman.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Chairman ARCHER. Gentlemen, again, thank you. And we will be
looking forward to having further input from you as we move
through this process. Thank you very much.
Mr. SAX. Thank you.
Mr. HANDLER. Thank you.
Mr. LIFSON. Thank you.
Chairman ARCHER. Our next panel, Mr. Kenneth Kies, Mr. David
Hariton, Mr. Martin Sullivan, and Mr. Danny Carpenter. Please
come to the witness table.
Welcome, gentlemen. As usual, your entire written statement,
without objection, will be inserted in the record. And if you will
make your verbal testimony as concise as possible, the Committee
would appreciate it.
And if each of you will identify yourself and the entity that you
represent before giving your testimony, that will be good for the
record.
Mr. Kies, would you begin?
STATEMENT OF KENNETH J. KIES, CO-MANAGING PARTNER,
WASHINGTON NATIONAL TAX SERVICES,
PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP
Mr. KIES. Yes, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, I am Ken Kies, co-
managing partner of PricewaterhouseCoopers, Washington tax
practice. The U.S. and Canadian tax practice of the worldwide firm
has more than 6,500 professionals.
Today I would like to focus my comments on what I believe to
be specific myths surrounding the debate over corporate tax shel-
ters. Also I have submitted extensive written testimony that I ap-
preciate the Chairman including in the record.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00105 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
102
The first myth I would like to discuss concerns corporate reve-
nues. Advocates of sweeping change will tell you that corporate tax
shelters are eroding the corporate tax base. There is no evidence
that supports this view. Yet the Treasury Department and others
continue to cite an unsubstantiated claim by Joseph Bankman, a
part-time teacher at Stanford University, that $10 million in tax
revenues are lost each year from corporate tax shelter activities.
Mr. Bankman is not an economist and has had limited experi-
ence with tax issues in private practice. He tells us in his Internet
chat room that this $10 billion figure is and, I quote, ‘‘obviously
just an estimate.’’ Yet this $10 billion figure keeps being repeated
by government officials as if it was somewhat a fact or the result
of an authoritative study; it is not.
The facts are as follows, as reflected on the charts in front of you.
First, corporate income tax revenues since 1992 have grown by
more than 80 percent. By contrast, the economy has grown by only
44 percent. Second, corporate income tax revenues over the past 4
years have been at the highest levels as a percentage of GDP than
at any time since 1980. These statistics suggests an extremely vi-
brant corporate income tax, not a system being eroded.
Myth number 2 is that the corporate tax shelter proposals ad-
vanced by Treasury Department and others would not hinder le-
gitimate business transactions. Treasury’s John Talisman in a let-
ter to Mr. Doggett has stated that the shelter proposals would not
unduly interfere with legitimate transactions. Frankly, it is not
okay to interfere with legitimate transactions. In reality, the shel-
ter proposals would cast considerable doubt on the continued legal-
ity of a wide range of legitimate transactions.
The UK earlier this year abandoned a proposal very similar to
the corporate tax shelter proposals before us because of concerns
over the uncertainties that proposals would have created for UK
corporations seeking to move forward with legitimate transactions.
You should also look to the U.S.-Italy income tax treaty. As pro-
posed, this new treaty included a so-called main purpose test that
would have given tax administrators the authority to disregard the
tax rules as written, if they believed tax reduction was a motiva-
tion behind a transaction.
In other words, this test looks a lot like the definitions of a cor-
porate tax shelter before us. The Joint Committee in testimony this
month rightfully criticized this treaty provision, calling the main
purpose test vague and subjective and noting that it can, and I
quote, ‘‘create planning difficulties for legitimate business trans-
actions.’’ Precisely the same arguments apply to the corporate tax
shelter proposals before us. The Senate has now stripped this test
from the Italian treaty.
Myth number 3 is that the IRS lacks sufficient tools under law
to combat abuse; a string of recent court victories by the IRS di-
rectly refutes this argument.
Myth number 4 is that new disclosure requirements would not
be burdensome. The broad disclosure requirements proposed would
force corporate taxpayers to generate mountains of paperwork de-
scribing a multitude of transactions. The UK abandoned its pro-
posed legislation in significant part due to concerns over the ability
to handle the extensive disclosure that would have been required.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00106 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
103
Myth number 5 is that a consensus has somehow formed around
new policies to address perceived shelters. The fact is that there
are considerable differences of opinion. The Joint Committee does
not support Treasury’s proposed expansion of section 269. More-
over, Treasury itself isn’t sure what the right answer is. Treasury’s
July ‘‘white paper,’’ released just before the July 4th recess, made
significant modifications to the shelter proposals included in the
administration’s own budget released just months earlier. This un-
certainty over policy throws into question the remaining proposals
that Treasury continues to promote.
In closing, I would simply say that proponents of sweeping cor-
porate tax shelter legislation have not met the burden of proof nec-
essary to justify enactment of changes as sweeping and radical as
the proposals before us. The fact of the matter is that corporate
taxes are inherently complex, as are corporate transactions them-
selves, and the relationship between the IRS and taxpayers is nat-
urally adversarial. As a result, there are going to be differences of
opinion over application of the tax law. These realities will not be
changed by the proposals before us.
Before I close, I would like to say that we at
PricewaterhouseCoopers take very seriously our professional re-
sponsibility as tax advisers. We are concerned about the perception
that has arisen that corporate tax planning is growing increasingly
abusive. We do not believe abuses are pervasive; however, we do
believe there are practitioners who engage in questionable activi-
ties. We believe this calls for a targeted and measured response.
Toward this end, we commend the Joint Committee for its pro-
posal to strengthen Circular 230 and regulations that govern the
professional conduct of tax practitioners. We are prepared to work
with the tax-writing Committees in considering this issue. And I
thank you very much for your time.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you, Mr. Kies, and you carefully pre-
pared your remarks to finish exactly at the 5-minute level.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of Kenneth J. Kies, Co-Managing Partner, Washington National
Tax Services, PricewaterhouseCoopers, LLP
I. INTRODUCTION
PricewaterhouseCoopers appreciates the opportunity to submit this written testi-
mony to the Committee on Ways and Means on the subject of ‘‘corporate tax shel-
ters.’’
PricewaterhouseCoopers, the world’s largest professional services organization,
provides a full range of business advisory services to corporations and other clients,
including audit, accounting, and tax consulting. The firm, which has more than
6,500 tax professionals in the United States and Canada, works closely with thou-
sands of corporate clients worldwide, including most of the companies comprising
the Fortune 500. These comments reflect the collective experiences of many of our
corporate clients.
Doing something about ‘‘corporate tax shelters’’ has a certain rhetorical appeal,
stoked by the press, that threatens to overwhelm principles of sound tax policy and
administration. Concerns have been expressed that large corporations routinely are
avoiding taxes by undertaking complex tax-motivated transactions. The Treasury
Department and others claim—without supporting evidence—that the corporate in-
come tax base is eroding and will continue to erode absent sweeping tax-law
changes and new restrictions on corporate tax executives.
In this testimony, we provide a detailed, reasoned analysis of the asserted ‘‘cor-
porate tax shelter’’ problem and the proposed remedies, taking into account actual
experiences of corporate taxpayers rather than theoretical speculation. We analyze
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00107 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
104
1The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters, Department of the Treasury, July 1999; General Ex-
planations of the Administration’s Revenue Proposals, Department of the Treasury, February
1999.
2 Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the
Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (Including Provisions Relating
to Corporate Tax Shelters), Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation, July 22, 1999 (JCS–3–
99) [hereinafter JCT study].
3 http://www.law.nyu.edu/bankmanj/federalincometax
4See, Martin A Sullivan, ‘‘Despite September Surge, Corporate Tax Receipts Fall Short,’’ 85
Tax Notes 565 (Nov. 1, 1999).
5 See, New York Times, September 21, 1999, ‘‘When an Expense is Not an Expense.’’ This arti-
cle points to rising compensation paid in the form of stock options as a possible explanation.
An increase in employee compensation increases personal income tax (at the employee level) at
the expense of corporate income tax, because employee compensation generally is deductible in
computing corporate income tax and includable in computing personal income tax.
6Congressional Budget Office, The Economic and Budget Outlook: An Update, July 1, 1999.
7The Administration’s FY 2000 budget projected that corporate income revenues would total
$182.2 billion in FY 1999, or $2.5 billion less than actual.
budget and economic data to determine whether there is empirical evidence sup-
porting the view that the corporate income tax base is being eviscerated. We explore
the efficacy of tools already available to the Treasury Department and the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS)—and to the Congress—to address abusive transactions. Fi-
nally, we consider the potential impact of proposals that have been advanced to date
by Treasury 1 , the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) 2 , and others.
We conclude that no justification has been presented that would support enact-
ment of such sweeping tax policy changes at this time. Economic data does not sug-
gest any systemic erosion of the corporate income tax base. Current-law administra-
tive tools, if used properly, are more than adequate to detect and penalize tax avoid-
ance. The legislative proposals that have been advanced are at odds with sound tax
policy principles and administration, would threaten legitimate tax-planning activi-
ties undertaken by corporate tax professionals, and would exacerbate the complexity
of the tax code.
II. ARGUMENTS AGAINST SWEEPING CHANGES
A. The Myth of the Eroding Corporate Income Tax Base
Both the Treasury Department and the JCT staff have cited as justification for
their proposals a possible erosion of corporate income tax revenues attributable to
‘‘corporate tax shelters.’’ Neither has presented any evidence to support this concern.
Rather, both have cited—as their only reference—statements made Joseph
Bankman of Stanford University that corporate tax shelters are responsible for $10
billion in lost corporate income tax revenues each year. Bankman essentially admits
he has no data supporting his $10 billion figure in his Internet tax policy chatroom,3
where he answers a question from a reader as to the references for his $10 billion
figure as follows: ‘‘The $10 billion figure that I am quoted on is obviously just an
estimate.’’ This unsubstantiated claim hardly represents the type of serious eco-
nomic analysis that should be undertaken before adopting sweeping tax policy
changes of the scope envisioned by Treasury and the JCT staff.
An analysis of actual data shows no evidence of a loss of corporate income tax
revenues attributable to shelter activities. Since 1992, corporate federal income tax
payments have grown by more than 80 percent, from $100.3 billion in fiscal 1992
to $184.7 billion in fiscal 1999 (see Appendix 1). By point of comparison, GDP has
grown by 44 percent over this period. Over the fiscal 1993–1999 period, corporate
tax payments averaged 2.1 percent of GDP; only once in the preceding 1980–1992
period were corporate income tax payments higher in percentage terms (in 1980).
Despite the high level of tax payments in the post–1992 period, some commenta-
tors have pointed to a two-percent drop in federal corporate tax payments in fiscal
1999, as compared to the prior year, as possibly indicating corporate tax shelter ac-
tivity.4 This claim has been made despite the fact that, at 2.1 percent of GDP in
fiscal 1999 (through June), corporate tax payments remain higher than the average
for the 1980–1999 period (1.9 percent).
A possible explanation for this drop is a relative decline in corporate profits attrib-
utable to depreciation deductions associated with increased equipment investment
and the increase in employee compensation relative to corporate profits.5 The Con-
gressional Budget Office in its mid-session review in July noted these as among the
factors putting downward pressure on corporate profits.6 It also should be noted
that the slight falloff in corporate profits was not unforeseen—the Office of Manage-
ment and Budget (OMB) at the beginning of this year projected that corporate in-
come tax payments would fall in FY 1999, before rising again in FY 2000.7 It should
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00108 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
105
8U.S. Dept. of the Treasury, Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipts and Outlays of the
United States Government.
9 See, IRS, Statistics of Income Bulletin, Winter 1998/1999.
be further noted that actual corporate income tax payments for FY 1999 exceeded
the January forecast by more than $2 billion.
In this section of the statement, we examine whether the recent dip in corporate
income tax payments provides any evidence that ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ activity is
proliferating. After a thorough review of the data, including data from the IRS, the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and corporate financial statements, we find no
basis for assertions that increased shelter activity has caused corporate tax burdens
to fall.
1. Corporate tax liability and the timing of tax payments
Corporate tax payments received by the IRS during a given year fail to reflect
that year’s tax liability for several reasons. First, large corporate taxpayers fre-
quently have five to ten ‘‘open’’ years for which final tax liability has not been deter-
mined. Thus, current corporate tax payments may include deficiencies (plus interest
and penalties) for a number of prior tax years. Similarly, current corporate tax pay-
ments may be reduced by refunds arising from overpayments of corporate tax in a
number of prior tax years. In addition, current tax payments may be reduced by
previously unused net operating losses and tax credits that are carried forward from
prior years. Thus, current data on corporate income tax payments received by the
IRS are not a reliable indicator of current year tax liability; rather, current year
tax receipts reflect a blend of current and past year tax liabilities, and are reduced
by carryforwards of unused losses and credits from prior years.
Corporate tax payments
Monthly information on receipts of corporate income taxes by the U.S. Govern-
ment is published by the Financial Management Service of the U.S. Treasury De-
partment. 8 The Treasury defines net corporate receipts in any month as gross re-
ceipts less refunds. Net corporate tax receipts were $185 billion in calendar year
1998, and are estimated to remain flat (at $184.6 billion) in 1999, based on
annualized results for the first nine months (see Appendix 2). Gross corporate tax
receipts in 1998 were $213.5 billion, and based on the first nine months of 1999,
gross receipts are estimated to increase by more than one percent to $216.4 billion.
The slight dip in net corporate receipts over the last two years is almost entirely
due to an increase in refunds. Refunds can increase as a result of overpayments of
estimated tax (which may occur when profits turn out to be lower than expected)
or as a result of amendments to prior year tax returns (for example, when current
year losses or credits are carried back to a prior tax year). Until the IRS tabulates
tax return data for 1998 and 1999, it is not possible to determine the reason for
the recent increase in refunds.
Corporate tax liability
For purposes of the National Income and Product Accounts, BEA makes current
estimates of corporate tax liability based on IRS and other data. The IRS calculates
annual corporate income tax liability by tabulating corporate tax returns (before
audit). The most recent publicly available corporate income tax return information
is for IRS years 1996 (i.e., tax years ending after June 1996 and before July 1997).9
In summary, it is important to distinguish between corporate tax liability and cor-
porate tax receipts. Because corporate tax receipts are a mix of estimated tax pay-
ments for the current year as well as adjustments (both up and down) to taxes paid
with respect to prior years, a drop in corporate tax receipts does not imply a drop
in corporate tax liability. For example, in 1985, corporate tax receipts increased over
the prior year at the same time that corporate tax liability decreased (see Appendix
2).
2. Effective Tax Rates: Commerce Department Data
Corporate tax liability can be broken down into two components: (1) a reference
measure of profits arising in the corporate sector; multiplied by (2) the effective tax
rate (which is equal to corporate tax divided by reference profits). A decline in cor-
porate tax liability can occur as a result of lower profits or, alternatively, as a result
of a lower effective tax rate. A decline in corporate tax liability due to a fall in real
corporate income is not, of course, evidence of tax shelter activity. By contrast, a
decline in the effective tax rate may warrant investigation to determine if there is
tax avoidance not intended by lawmakers.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00109 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
106
10BEA makes two adjustments to this measure of corporate profits in determining GDP: (1)
BEA uses an ‘‘economic’’ measure of depreciation rather than tax depreciation (i.e., the ‘‘capital
consumption adjustment’’); and (2) BEA removes inventory profits attributable to changes in
price (i.e., the ‘‘inventory valuation adjustment’’).
11 See, Congressional Budget Office, The Shortfall in Corporate Tax Receipts Since the Tax
Reform Act of 1986, CBO Papers, May 1992. The first adjustment reflects the fact that the Fed-
eral Reserve system is not subject to corporate income tax; the second adjustment is made be-
cause S corporations generally do not pay corporate level tax (rather the income is flowed
through to the shareholders); the third adjustment is made because state and local income taxes
are deductible in computing federal income tax; and the fourth adjustment is necessary because
corporations are taxed on capital gains while GDP excludes capital gains.
12 1999 data are annualized based on the first six months of the year, seasonally adjusted.
13 See, General Accounting Office, ‘‘1988 and 1989 Company Effective Tax Rates Higher Than
in Prior Years,’’ GAO/GGD–92–11, August 1992.
14Financial statements for companies with fiscal years ending after May of 1998, and before
June of 1999, are classified as 1998 statements in Compustat. Because there is a lag between
the end of a company’s fiscal year and the time it files Form 10K, and another lag between the
time the form is filed and the time it is processed by Standard & Poors, information for
Compustat’s 1998 year was incomplete as of August 1999.
Calculation of the effective corporate tax rate requires a measure of corporate in-
come tax liability as well as a reference measure of corporate profits. Two data
sources are used in this analysis: (1) the National Income and Product Accounts
(NIPA) published by the U.S. Commerce Department; and (2) data from audited fi-
nancial statements of public companies filed with the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission (SEC) on Form 10K. Effective tax rate calculations based on NIPA data are
described in this section; calculations based on SEC data are described in the fol-
lowing section.
One of the items used by BEA to calculate GDP is ‘‘corporate profits before tax.’’ 10
This concept of profits includes income earned in the United States (whether by U.S.
or foreign corporations) and excludes income earned outside the United States. For
purposes of calculating an effective tax rate, several adjustments are made to ‘‘cor-
porate profits before tax&quot;: (1) profits of the Federal Reserve Banks are sub-
tracted; (2) profits of subchapter S corporations are subtracted; (3) payments of
State and local income tax are subtracted; and (4) corporate capital gains are added.
These adjustments follow the methodology developed by CBO to estimate ‘‘taxable
corporate profits.’’ 11 BEA estimates that corporate profits before tax, as adjusted,
increased from $587 billion in calendar 1998 to $603 billion in 1999 (see Appendix
3).12 As a percent of GDP, pre-tax corporate profits are estimated to have reached
a post–1980 high of 7.0 percent in 1996, with a dip to 6.9 percent in 1997–1998,
and a further dip to 6.8 percent in the first half of calendar 1999 on an annualized
basis.
Based on adjusted NIPA data, the effective corporate tax rate, measured as fed-
eral corporate tax liability divided by corporate profits before federal income tax, is
projected to be 32.7 percent in 1999, higher than the 31.2 percent rate in 1998 and
higher than the 32.6 percent average for the 1993–1999 period (see Appendix 3).
Thus, based on the National Income and Product Accounts, there is no evidence of
a decline in the effective rate of corporate income tax.
3. Effective Tax Rates: SEC Data
Corporate effective tax rates also can be estimated from the audited financial
statements that publicly traded companies are required to file with the SEC. This
method was used by the General Accounting Office in its 1992 study of corporate
effective tax rates.13 Following the GAO methodology, the effective corporate tax
rate is measured by dividing the current provision for federal income tax into re-
ported U.S. operating income, reduced by the current provision for State and local
income tax. U.S. operating income is determined by subtracting foreign operating
income from total operating income net of depreciation, based on geographic seg-
ment reporting.
Standard & Poors publishes SEC 10K data in its Compustat database, which is
updated monthly.14 Based on the August 1999 Compustat data release, effective cor-
porate tax rates were calculated for the 1988–1998 period using information from
every corporation in the database that supplied all of the necessary data items. Rec-
ognizing that the results for 1998 might not be comparable to prior years due to
the limited sample size, the effective tax rates for 1996 and 1997 were recomputed
using information from the same companies as in the 1998 sample.
For purposes of this analysis we excluded publicly traded corporations and part-
nerships that are not generally taxable at the corporate level (i.e., mutual funds and
real estate investment trusts). Separate calculations were made for companies that
reported foreign activity (multinationals) and for companies that reported no foreign
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00110 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
107
15These results also generally hold up when effective tax rates are measured relative to U.S.
assets or U.S. revenues. Among domestic-only firms, however, income has grown more slowly
than either assets or revenues since 1995, with the result that the ratio of tax liability to either
assets or revenues has declined slightly for companies without foreign operations.
16Michael Schler, as quoted in the September 1, 1999, Wall Street Journal ‘‘Tax Report,’’ A1.
activity (domestics). A multinational’s current provision for U.S. tax may include
U.S. tax on foreign source income; consequently, measured relative to domestic in-
come, the effective tax rate of U.S. multinationals may be higher than for com-
parable domestic firms. In theory, U.S. tax on foreign source income should be re-
moved from the numerator of a domestic effective tax rate calculation; however, this
adjustment cannot accurately be made with financial statement data.
The results of this analysis are shown in Appendix 4. For 1997, the most recent
year for which annual reporting is complete, companies included in the Compustat
sample report $78 billion of current federal income tax liability, accounting for over
40 percent of federal corporate tax liability in the National Income and Product Ac-
counts. The Compustat sample of firms excludes private companies and public com-
panies that do not report all of the items necessary to calculate the effective tax
rate. While the average firm in Compustat is much larger than the average cor-
porate taxpayer, the main purpose of our analysis is to examine the trend in effec-
tive corporate tax rates over time. We have no reason to believe that there is a sys-
tematic difference in trend effective tax rates between companies in Compustat and
other corporate taxpayers. Indeed, if there were a proliferation of corporate tax shel-
ter activity, we might expect to see indications of this first among the largest and
most sophisticated corporations, of the type included in the Compustat sample.
In general, we find that the effective tax rates calculated from financial statement
data are lower than those calculated from the National Income and Product Ac-
counts. One reason for this is that the profit definition used for the NIPA calcula-
tions is based on tax depreciation, while the profit definition used for the financial
statement calculations is based on book depreciation. Another reason is that the in-
come element of nonqualified stock options is deductible for tax purposes when the
option is excercised (and included in the employee’s income), but is not treated as
an expense against income for financial statement purposes. We also find that, on
average, over the 1988–1998 period, effective federal tax rates are higher for multi-
national corporation than for domestic corporations.
Based on financial statement data, the corporate effective tax rate for all corpora-
tions (domestic and multinational) was higher in 1997 (19.9 percent) than the aver-
age over the ten-year period 1988–1997 (18.5) percent, and for the sample of compa-
nies reporting financial results for 1998, the effective tax rate increased between
1997 (19.4 percent) and 1998 (20.7 percent).15
In summary, based on audited financial statements, there is no evidence for a de-
cline in the effective corporate tax rate. This is consistent with our findings using
National Income and Product Account data.
4. Corporate capital gains
One category of corporate ‘‘tax shelter’’ that has received recent attention is the
use of transactions designed to avoid tax on capital gains. Indeed, one commentator
believes these transactions are so prevalent that the tax on corporate capital gains
has essentially been rendered ‘‘elective.’’16 If this assessment of the corporate income
tax system were accurate, we would expect to see a marked decline in corporate cap-
ital gain realizations in recent years.
The IRS data, however, do not support the view that corporations easily can avoid
tax on capital gains. Excluding mutual funds, net corporate gain on capital assets
increased by 54 percent from $53 billion in 1992 to $82 billion in 1996 (the most
recent year for which IRS data is available)—an average annual increase of 11.5
percent per year (see Appendix 5). In short, notices of the death of the corporate
capital gains tax are premature.
5. Conclusion
If unusually high levels of corporate tax shelter activity have been occurring over
the last few years, we would expect to see a drop in corporate tax liability relative
to normative measures of pre-tax corporate income. To test this hypothesis, we
measure corporate effective tax rates using data from the National Income and
Product Accounts and audited financial statements. Neither measure shows a sus-
picious drop in tax liabilities relative to corporate income; to the contrary, both
measures show flat or rising corporate effective tax rates over the last five years.
Moreover, if corporate capital gains tax was easily avoidable using tax shelter tech-
niques, we would expect to see little or no growth in net capital gains reported on
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00111 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
108
17Section 6662(d)(2)(C)(iii). Prior law defined tax shelter activity as an entity, plan, or ar-
rangement only if it had tax avoidance or evasion as the principal purpose.
18General Explanation of Tax Legislation Enacted in 1997, Staff of the Joint Committee on
Taxation, December 17, 1997 (JCS 23–97).
19 Treas. Reg. § 1.701–2.
20Treas. Reg. § 1.1502–32(e).
corporate tax returns. Again, the data disprove this hypothesis, showing instead a
robust rate of increase over the most recent four-year period for which data are
available.
B. Efficacy of Current-Law Tools
Proponents of extensive new legislation to address ‘‘corporate tax shelters’’ over-
look the formidable array of tools currently available to the government to deter and
attack transactions considered as abusive. In our view, the tools described below are
more than sufficient to achieve compliance with the corporate income tax. That is,
these tools enable the IRS and courts to ensure that corporations pay the corporate
income tax liability that results from application of the Internal Revenue Code.
1. Threat of penalties
As an initial matter, the tax Code includes significant disincentives to engage in
potentially abusive behavior. Present law imposes 20-percent accuracy-related pen-
alties under section 6662 in the case of negligence, substantial understatements of
tax liability, and certain other cases. In considering a proposed transaction that may
turn on a debatable reading of the tax law, a corporate tax executive must weigh
the potential for imposition of these penalties, which could have a negative impact
on shareholder value and on the corporation.
Furthermore, it should be noted that Congress, in the 1997 Taxpayer Relief Act,
strengthened the substantial understatement penalty as it applies to ‘‘tax shelters.’’
Under this change, which was supported and encouraged by the Treasury Depart-
ment, an entity, plan, or arrangement is treated as a tax shelter if it has tax avoid-
ance or evasion as just one of its significant purposes.17 The Congress believed that
this change, coupled with new reporting requirements that Treasury has failed to
activate, would ‘‘improve compliance by discouraging taxpayers from entering into
questionable transactions.’’ 18 Although this change is effective for current trans-
actions, the IRS and Treasury have not yet issued regulations providing guidance
on the term ‘‘significant purpose.’’
The 1997 Act changes have made it even more important for chief tax executives
to weigh carefully the risks of penalties and even more difficult to determine which
transactions might trigger penalties. At this time, there is no demonstrated jus-
tification for making these penalties even harsher.
2. Anti-abuse rules
The Code includes numerous provisions that arm Treasury and the IRS with
broad authority to prevent tax avoidance, to reallocate income and deductions, to
deny tax benefits, and to ensure taxpayers clearly report income.
These rules long have provided powerful ammunition for challenging tax avoid-
ance transactions. For example, section 482 authorizes the IRS to reallocate income,
deductions, credits, or allowances between controlled taxpayers to prevent evasion
of taxes or to clearly reflect income. While much attention has been focused in re-
cent years on the application of section 482 in the international context, section 482
also applies broadly in purely domestic situations. Further, the IRS also has the au-
thority to disregard a taxpayer’s method of accounting if it does not clearly reflect
income under section 446(b).
In the partnership context, the IRS has issued regulations under subchapter K
aimed at arrangements the IRS considers as abusive.19 The IRS states that these
rules authorize it to disregard the existence of a partnership, to adjust a partner-
ship’s methods of accounting, to reallocate items of income, gain, loss, deduction, or
credit, or otherwise to adjust a partnership’s or partner’s tax treatment in situations
where a transaction meets the literal requirements of a statutory or regulatory pro-
vision, but where the IRS believes the results are inconsistent with the intent of
the Code’s partnership tax rules.
The IRS also has issued a series of far-reaching anti-abuse rules under its legisla-
tive grant of regulatory authority in the consolidated return area. For example,
under Treas. Reg. Sec. 1.1502–20, a parent corporation is severely limited in its
ability to deduct any loss on the sale of a consolidated subsidiary’s stock. The con-
solidated return investment basis adjustment rules also contain an anti-avoidance
rule.20 The rule provides that the IRS may make adjustments ‘‘as necessary’’ if a
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00112 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
109
21E.g., Treas. Reg. § 1.1502–13(h) (anti-avoidance rules with respect to the intercompany
transaction provisions) and Treas. Reg. § 1.1502–17(c) (anti-avoidance rules with respect to the
consolidated return accounting methods).
22 157 F.3d 231 (3d Cir. 1998). See also Saba Partnership, T.C.M. 1999–359 (10/27/99).
23 T.C.M. 1998–305.
24T.C.M. 1999–268.
25 113. T.C. No. 17.
26 113. T.C. No. 21.
person acts with ‘‘a principal purpose’’ of avoiding the requirements of the consoli-
dated return rules. The consolidated return rules feature several other anti-abuse
rules as well.21
3. Common-law doctrines
Pursuant to several ‘‘common-law’’ tax doctrines, Treasury and the IRS can chal-
lenge a taxpayer’s treatment of a transaction if they believe the treatment is incon-
sistent with statutory rules and the underlying Congressional intent. For example,
these doctrines may be invoked where the IRS believes that (1) the taxpayer has
sought to circumvent statutory requirements by casting the transaction in a form
designed to disguise its substance, (2) the taxpayer has divided the transaction into
separate steps that have little or no independent life or rationale, (3) the taxpayer
has engaged in ‘‘trafficking’’ in tax attributes, or (4) the taxpayer improperly has
accelerated deductions or deferred income recognition.
These broadly applicable doctrines—known as the business purpose doctrine, the
substance over form doctrine, the step transaction doctrine, and the sham trans-
action and economic substance doctrine—give the IRS considerable leeway to recast
transactions based on economic substance, to treat apparently separate steps as one
transaction, and to disregard transactions that lack business purpose or economic
substance. Recent applications of those doctrines have demonstrated their effective-
ness and cast doubt on Treasury’s asserted need for additional tools.
The recent decisions in ACM v. Commissioner 22 and ASA Investerings v. Commis-
sioner 23 illustrate the continuing force of these long-standing judicial doctrines. In
ACM, the Third Circuit, affirming the Tax Court, relied on the sham transaction
and economic substance doctrines to disallow losses generated by a partnership’s
purchase and resale of notes. The Tax Court similarly invoked those doctrines in
ASA Investerings to disallow losses on the purchase and resale of private placement
notes. Both cases involved complex, highly sophisticated transactions, yet the IRS
successfully used common-law principles to prevent the taxpayers from realizing tax
benefits from the transactions.
More recent examples of use of common-law doctrines by the IRS are the Tax
Court’s decisions in United Parcel Service v. Commissioner 24 (8/9/99), Compaq Com-
puter Corp. v. Commissioner 25 (9/21/99), and Winn-Dixie v. Commissioner 26 (10/19/
99). In United Parcel Service, the court agreed with the IRS’s position that the ar-
rangement at issue—involving the taxpayer, a third-party U.S. insurance company
acting as an intermediary, and an offshore company acting as a reinsurer—lacked
business purpose and economic substance. In Compaq, the court agreed with the
IRS’s contention that the taxpayer’s purchase and resale of certain financial instru-
ments lacked economic substance and imposed accuracy-related penalties under sec-
tion 6662(a). In Winn-Dixie, the court held that an employer’s leveraged corporate-
owned life insurance program lacked business purpose and economic substance.
This recent line of cases and the IRS’s increasingly successful use of common-law
doctrines in these cases argue against any need for expanding the IRS’s tools at this
time or, as the Treasury Department has suggested, codifying such doctrines.
4. Treasury action
Treasury on numerous occasions has issued IRS Notices stating an intention to
publish regulations that would preclude favorable tax treatment for certain trans-
actions. Thus, a Notice allows the government (assuming that the particular action
is within Treasury’s rulemaking authority) to move quickly, without having to await
development of the regulations themselves—often a time-consuming process—that
provide more detailed rules concerning a particular transaction.
Recent examples of the use of this authority include Notice 97–21, in which the
IRS addressed multiple-party financing transactions that used a special type of pre-
ferred stock; Notice 95–53, in which the IRS addressed the tax consequences of
‘‘lease strip’’ or ‘‘stripping transactions’’ separating income from deductions; and No-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00113 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
110
27The General Utilities doctrine generally provided for nonrecognition of gain or loss on a cor-
poration’s distribution of property to its shareholders with respect to their stock. See, General
Utils. & Operating Co. v. Helvering, 296 U.S. 200 (1935). The General Utilities doctrine was
repealed in 1986 out of concern that the doctrine tended to undermine the application of the
corporate-level income tax. H.R. Rep. No. 426, 99th Cong., 1st Sess. 282 (1985).
28 See, e.g., Notice 95–53, 1995–2 CB 334, and Notice 89–37, 1989–1 CB 679.
29 See, e.g., Notice 97–21, 1997–1 CB 407.
30Notice 96–39, I.R.B. 1996–32.
31Treasury Department Acting Assistant Secretary (Tax Policy) Jonathan Talisman, in an Oc-
tober 4 letter to Rep. Lloyd Doggett (D–TX) states that the Administration’s proposals would
not ‘‘unduly’’ interfere with legitimate business transactions.
32 Individual taxpayers often undertake actions to obtain favorable tax treatment, but this
alone is not considered a reason simply to disallow the benefits. For example, an individual
holding an appreciated security may decide to hold it for sale until a particular date solely to
obtain long-term capital gain treatment. Also, an individual may take out a home-equity loan
to pay off credit-card debt because interest on the home loan can be tax deductible. As another
tices 94–46 and 94–93, addressing so-called ‘‘corporate inversion’’ transactions
viewed as avoiding the 1986 Act’s repeal of the General Utilities doctrine. 27
Moreover, section 7805(b) of the Code expressly gives the IRS authority to issue
regulations that have retroactive effect ‘‘to prevent abuse.’’ Although many Notices
have set the date of Notice issuance as the effective date for forthcoming regula-
tions,28 Treasury has used its authority to announce regulations that would be effec-
tive for periods prior to the date the Notice was issued.29 Alternatively, Treasury
in Notices has announced that it will rely on existing law to challenge abusive
transactions that already have occurred.30
5. Targeted legislation
To the extent that Treasury and the IRS may lack rulemaking or administrative
authority to challenge a particular type of transaction, one other highly effective av-
enue remains open—that is, enactment of legislation. In this regard, over the past
30 years dozens upon dozens of changes to the tax code have been enacted to ad-
dress perceived abuses. For example, earlier this year Congress enacted legislation
(H.R. 435) addressing ‘‘basis-shifting’’ transactions involving transfers of assets sub-
ject to liabilities under section 357(c).
These targeted legislative changes often have immediate, or even retroactive, ap-
plication. The section 357(c) provision, for example, was made effective for transfers
on or after October 19, 1998—the date House Ways and Means Committee Chair-
man Bill Archer introduced the proposal in the form of legislation. Chairman Archer
took this action, in part, to stop these transactions earlier than would have been
accomplished under the effective date originally proposed by Treasury (the date of
enactment).
C. Adverse Impact of Proposals
The Treasury, JCT staff, and similar proposals addressing ‘‘corporate tax shelters’’
would impose additional uncertainty and burdens on corporate tax executives. As
discussed below, each turns on a vague and subjective definition of ‘‘corporate tax
shelter’’ that would threaten to sweep in legitimate transactions undertaken in the
ordinary course of business, such as financing transactions, capital restructuring
transactions, corporate reorganizations, and other transactions. Businesses already
are confronted by a complicated, ever-changing, and in many instances, arcane and
outdated tax system comprised of an intricate jumble of statutes, case law, regula-
tions, rulings, and administrative procedural requirements. Rather than providing
clearer and more precise rules defining transactions viewed as abusive, the pro-
posals would add new layers of complexity and uncertainty.31
Some commentators have suggested that the broad sweep of the ‘‘corporate tax
shelter’’ proposals can be justified as representing a balance between ‘‘objective’’
rules and ‘‘flexible’’ concepts to ensure appropriate behavior by corporations. We dis-
agree, believing that the vast majority of corporations abide by rules of appropriate
planning and that the extremely broad and vague concepts introduced by the pro-
posals severely would hamper legitimate business planning. Faced with the regime
of draconian sanctions proposed by Treasury and the JCT staff, taxpayers would
find it difficult to make business decisions with any certainty as to the tax con-
sequences. This would be particularly true since classification as a ‘‘tax shelter’’
could result not from taking an incorrect position under the tax code, but merely
because ‘‘significant’’ tax benefits resulted from certain vaguely defined types of ar-
rangements.
Like individual taxpayers,32 corporations have the right legitimately to seek mini-
mization of tax liabilities, i.e., to pay no more in taxes than the tax law demands.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00114 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
111
example, an individual renting a home may decide to purchase it, viewing the tax benefits as
a principal purpose for entering into the transaction. In such cases, Congress has not been con-
cerned that the taxpayer acted out of tax motivations; the tax benefits still are allowed.
33 Judge Learned Hand wrote: ‘‘Over and over again courts have said that there is nothing
sinister in so arranging one’s affairs as to keep taxes as low as possible. Everybody does so,
rich or poor; and all do right, for nobody owes any public duty to pay more than the law de-
mands: taxes are enforced extractions, not voluntary contributions.’’ Comm’r v. Newman, 159
F.2d 848, 850–851 (2d Cir. 1946) (dissenting opinion).
34Of the $1.7 trillion in tax revenue collected by the federal government in FY 1998, corpora-
tions either remitted directly or withheld and remitted more than 50 percent, vastly reducing
the compliance burden on the IRS and individuals.
35 ‘‘Explanation of Proposed Income Tax Treaty and Proposed Protocol between the United
States and the Italian Republic,’’ October 8, 1999 (JCS–9–99); see also, ‘‘Testimony of the Staff
of the Joint Committee on Taxation before the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Hearing
on Tax Treaties and Protocols with Eight Countries,’’ October 27, 1999 (JCX–76–99).
Indeed, corporate executives have a fiduciary duty to preserve and increase the
value of a corporation for its shareholders. Some commentators decry this responsi-
bility, termed ‘‘profit center activity’’ in current management parlance, as wrong. We
disagree. Responsible minimization of taxes in conjunction with the business activ-
ity of a corporation is one important function of corporate executives seeking to en-
hance profitability, and one that long has been viewed as consistent with sound pol-
icy objectives.33
In a broad sense, the proposals overlook the significant responsibilities shouldered
by corporate tax executives in collecting and remitting corporate income taxes, with-
holding taxes, and an array of excise taxes.34 In addition to these duties as a signifi-
cant private administrator of the U.S. tax code, a chief corporate tax executive must
understand management’s business decisions and planning objectives, and provide
reasoned advice to management on the tax consequences of various possible busi-
ness decisions and on appropriate ways to minimize tax liabilities. Once these busi-
ness decisions are made, the tax executive must implement them by supervising the
formation of applicable entities, creating systems for capturing tax-related informa-
tion as it is generated from the business, and implementing procedures for the cal-
culation and remittance of taxes, information returns, and additional documentation
necessary for compliance. The collective effect of the Treasury and JCT staff ‘‘shel-
ter’’ proposals would be to penalize these responsible tax executives by adding to
their burden and increasing complexity and uncertainty in determining the tax con-
sequences of business decisions.
Ironically, the proposed ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ definitions strongly resemble a test
included in the new U.S.-Italy Income Tax Treaty and the new U.S.-Slovenia Income
Tax Treaty that drew strong criticism from the JCT staff. ‘‘Main purpose’’ tests in
the proposed treaties would have denied treaty benefits (e.g., reduced withholding
rates on dividends) if the main purpose of a taxpayer’s transaction is to take advan-
tage of treaty benefits. The JCT staff correctly raised policy objections to this pro-
posed test:
The new main purpose tests in the proposed treaty present several issues.
The tests are subjective, vague and add uncertainty to the treaty. It is un-
clear how the provisions are to be applied. . . . This uncertainty can create
planning difficulties for legitimate business transactions, and can hinder a
taxpayer’s ability to rely on the treaty. . . . This is a subjective standard,
dependent on the intent of the taxpayer, that is difficult to evaluate. . . .
It is also unclear how the rule would be administered. . . . In any event,
it may be difficult for a U.S. company to evaluate whether its transaction
may be subject to Italian main purpose standards.35
The Senate approved these treaties on November 5. In light of concerns raised by
the JCT staff and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, the Senate approved the
treaties subject to a ‘‘reservation’’ that has the effect of eliminating the ‘‘main pur-
pose’’ test.
These very same objections—‘‘vague,’’ ‘‘subjective,’’ ‘‘difficulties for legitimate busi-
ness transactions’’—have been raised by businesses with respect to the Treasury’s
and the JCT staff’s ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ proposals. Any distinction between the
‘‘main purpose’’ test and the ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ tests is extremely fine. Like the
‘‘main purpose’’ test, these proposals would give tax administrators broad authority
to disregard the application of written rules where they believe they see tax consid-
erations playing too important a role in structuring transactions.
D. Worldwide Experience with Anti-Avoidance Rules
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00115 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
112
36Graeme S. Cooper, Tax Avoidance and the Rule of Law, IBFD Publications BV, 1997, p.
10.
37Brian Arnold, ‘‘The Canadian General Anti-Avoidance Rule,’’ Tax Avoidance and the Rule
of Law, ed. Graeme S. Cooper, IBFD Publications BV, 1997, p. 241.
38 Ibid. p. 244.
39Cooper, supra p. 10.
40 Jeffrey Waincymer, ‘‘The Australian Tax Avoidance Experience and Responses: A Critical
Review,’’ Tax Avoidance and the Rule of Law, ed. Graeme S. Cooper, IBFD Publications BV,
1997, p. 306.
41 ‘‘A General Anti-Avoidance Rule for Direct Taxes: Consultative Document,’’ U.K. Inland
Revenue, October 1998.
42 Id., at 6.5.2.
Recent experiments with ‘‘anti-avoidance’’ tax legislation undertaken by other
major industrialized countries provide useful case histories for U.S. policymakers
contemplating the Treasury and JCT staff proposals.
Sweden
Sweden repealed its ‘‘general anti-avoidance rule’’ (GAAR) in 1993 following ‘‘some
dissatisfaction with its performance.’’ 36
Canada
Canada in 1988 adopted a GAAR disregarding transactions resulting in reduc-
tions of tax unless the transaction is carried out primarily for non-tax purposes. Re-
garding the practical impact of the Canadian GAAR, one commentator has noted
that ‘‘very few transactions that would have been carried out before the introduction
of the rule have not been carried out since its introduction.’’ 37 While withholding
final judgment on the GAAR, the commentator has noted that ‘‘the courts could
make the rule into an overly broad weapon that discourages legitimate commercial
activity.’’ 38 This commentator also notes that the Canadian GAAR was enacted
after the Canadian Supreme Court had rejected judicial approaches to fighting tax-
avoidance—this absence of judicial activism is hardly the case in the United States,
as the recent ACM, United Parcel Service, and Winn-Dixie decisions clearly show.
As one observer has noted, in the United States, ‘‘robust judicial doctrines have
served in the place of a GAAR.’’ 39
Australia
Australia reinstituted a GAAR in 1981, following the failure of earlier GAAR pro-
vision. The new GAAR continued to draw criticism. As one commentator has noted,
‘‘If we are concerned about the philosophical questions as to the rule of law in a
complex society and not just about revenue collection, we should as a result have
concerns about the present GAAR operative in Australia.’’ 40
United Kingdom
The United Kingdom’s recent experience with a GAAR is particularly noteworthy.
In the 1997 Labor Party budget submission, U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer Gor-
don Brown proposed creation of a GAAR to counter perceived tax avoidance in the
corporate sector. The U.K. Inland Revenue was directed to review this area and con-
sider how such a GAAR might be framed.
A ‘‘consultative document’’ 41 published by Inland Revenue in October 1998 pro-
vided a rough draft for a GAAR. Inland Revenue would be given authority to ignore
‘‘tax-driven transactions’’ or to substitute the tax results that would have been pro-
duced by a ‘‘normal’’ commercial transaction. A ‘‘tax-driven transaction’’ would be
defined as a transaction one of whose main purposes is ‘‘tax avoidance.’’ ‘‘Tax avoid-
ance’’ would defined as: 42
(a) not paying tax, paying less tax, or paying later than would otherwise
be the case,
(b) obtaining repayment or increased repayment of tax, or obtaining repay-
ment earlier than would otherwise be the case, or
(c) obtaining payment or increased payment by way of tax credit, or obtain-
ing such payment earlier than would otherwise be the case.
The draft plan also discussed a safe harbor for ‘‘acceptable tax planning,’’ which
Inland Revenue sketchily defined as ‘‘arranging one’s affairs so as to avoid tax in
a way that does not conflict with or defeat the purpose of the legislation.’’
Businesses responded that the proposal, with its lack of any objective test, would
raise significant uncertainties over the tax treatment of transactions undertaken in
the normal course of business. The draft plan itself envisioned that taxpayers would
need some sort of quick ‘‘clearance,’’ before undertaking a transaction, that Inland
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00116 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
113
43Treasury dropped proposals to eliminate completely the reasonable cause exception in the
case of ‘‘corporate tax shelters,’’ to disallow deductions for fees paid to tax shelter promoters and
advisors, and to impose a 25-percent excise tax on tax benefits subject to rescission or insurance
provisions.
44These comments supplement analysis provided in testimony presented by
PricewaterhouseCoopers in conjunction with the House Ways and Means Committee’s March 10,
1999, hearing on the revenue proposals in the Administration’s FY 2000 budget.
Revenue would not seek to apply the GAAR to the transaction. However, following
issuance of the draft, concerns mounted at Inland Revenue that the agency might
lack the resources to process clearance applications on a timely basis. In light of
problems that had been identified calling into question whether a GAAR could work
in practice, Chancellor Brown in March 1999 announced that the U.K. government
would not be proceeding with plans to implement the GAAR.
The U.K. experience with the GAAR proposal parallels the current U.S. ‘‘corporate
tax shelter’’ proposals. Both initiatives would rely on subjective terminology and
would give broad discretion to the taxing authorities, raising concerns from the busi-
ness sector that legitimate transactions would be affected. For U.S. policymakers,
the U.K. experience with the GAAR presents a clear picture of the dangers and dif-
ficulties associated with overly broad anti-avoidance rules. As with the U.K. experi-
ence, the IRS would not be able to provide effective and timely advance approval
of a multitude of transactions submitted for clearance; also taxpayers would incur
substantial costs in applying for approval.
We respectfully urge Congress to reach the same conclusion regarding Treasury’s
and the JCT staff proposals that prudent decisionmakers in the United Kingdom ul-
timately reached in rejecting the GAAR proposal.
III. ANALYSIS OF ‘‘CORPORATE TAX SHELTER’’ PROPOSALS
A. Treasury Department Proposals
The Treasury Department’s ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ proposals were advanced in
the Administration’s FY 2000 budget and revised in a ‘‘White Paper’’ published July
1, 1999.43 The following are brief summaries of the Treasury proposals as revised,
followed by our comments: 44
1. Disallowance of tax benefits
Summary
The proposal would disallow deductions, credits, exclusions, or other allowances
obtained in a ‘‘tax avoidance transaction.’’ This would be defined generally as any
transaction in which the reasonably expected pre-tax profit of the transaction is in-
significant relative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits of such transaction.
The proposal also would deny tax benefits associated with financing transactions
where the benefits are in excess of the economic return of the counterparty to the
transaction.
Comment
The proposal would expand the current-law section 269 rules to deny deductions
or other tax allowances flowing from a ‘‘tax avoidance transaction,’’ an entirely new
and vague concept. While the first prong of Treasury’s definition of this term is
styled as an objective test, the inclusion of subjective or unexplained concepts in the
equation precludes such a characterization. The proposal raises significant questions
of policy and practicality. As an initial matter, what constitutes the ‘‘transaction’’
for purposes of this test? Next, what are the parameters for ‘‘reasonable expectation’’
in terms of both pre-tax economic profit and tax benefits? Further, where is the line
drawn regarding the significance of the reasonably expected pre-tax economic profit
relative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits?
Under this ill-defined proposal, even though a taxpayer’s transaction may have
economic substance and legitimate business purpose, the tax savings could be de-
nied to the taxpayer if another route of achieving the same end result would have
resulted in the remittance of more tax. The proposed expansion of section 269 would
create uncertainty for corporate taxpayers that engage in prudent tax planning to
implement business objectives.
2. Substantial understatement penalty
Summary
The substantial understatement penalty imposed on corporate tax shelter items
generally would be increased to 40 percent (reduced to 20 percent if the taxpayer
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00117 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
114
satisfies certain disclosure requirements). The reasonable cause exception would be
retained, but narrowed with respect to transactions deemed to constitute a corporate
tax shelter—for these transactions, taxpayers would have to have a ‘‘strong’’ prob-
ability of success on the merits and to meet disclosure requirements. A ‘‘corporate
tax shelter’’ would be defined as any arrangement (to be determined based on all
the facts and circumstances) in which a direct or indirect corporate participant at-
tempts to obtain a tax benefit in a tax avoidance transaction.
Comment
This proposal is overbroad, unnecessary, and inconsistent with the goals of
rationalizing penalty administration and reducing taxpayer burdens. Here again,
the penalty would introduce the vague concept of ‘‘tax avoidance transaction.’’
Second, sharp restrictions on the reasonable cause exception would result in situa-
tions where a revenue agent may feel compelled to impose a punitive 40-percent
penalty even though the agent determines that (1) there is substantial authority
supporting the return position taken by the taxpayer, and (2) the taxpayer reason-
ably believed (based, for example, on the opinion or advice of a qualified tax profes-
sional) that its tax treatment of the item was more likely than not the proper treat-
ment. It is doubtful that agents would accept a taxpayer’s argument against applica-
tion of the penalty based on having had a ‘‘strong probability of success,’’ an unde-
fined term setting an unrealistically high threshold.
Rather than serving as a deterrent to undertaking questionable transactions, the
virtually automatic proposed penalty would penalize—at a harsh 40-percent rate—
taxpayers for entering into arrangements that they reasonably believed to be proper
and supported by substantial authority.
3. Disclosure
Summary
The Treasury proposal would require disclosure of transactions that have a com-
bination of ‘‘some’’ of the following characteristics: a book/tax difference in excess of
a certain amount; a rescission clause, an unwind provision, or insurance or similar
arrangement for the anticipated tax benefits; involvement with a tax-indifferent
party; advisor fees in excess of a certain amount or contingent fees; a confidentiality
arrangement; and the offering of the transaction to multiple corporations.
Disclosure would be required of corporations and promoters. Corporations enter-
ing into transactions having these characteristics would be required to file a disclo-
sure form with the IRS National Office by the due date of the tax return for the
taxable year for which the transaction is entered into. The corporation also would
have to attach the form to all tax returns to which the transaction applies. Pro-
moters would be required to file the disclosure form within 30 days of offering the
transaction.
The form would require information regarding the transaction characteristics dis-
cussed above and the nature and business or economic objective of the transaction.
For corporations, it would have to be signed by a corporate officer who has knowl-
edge of the factual underpinnings of the transaction for which disclosure is required;
the officer would be ‘‘personally liable’’ for misstatements on the form. The corpora-
tion would not be required to file the form if it had specific knowledge that the pro-
moter had disclosed the transaction. A ‘‘significant’’ monetary penalty would apply
for failure to disclose.
Taxpayers also would be required to disclose on the return transactions reported
differently from their form if the tax benefits exceed a certain threshold amount.
Comment
This proposal represents another example of Treasury overreaction aimed at per-
ceived ‘‘shelter’’ transactions, imposing further burdens on corporate taxpayers. The
existing tax shelter registration rules—which Treasury has yet to implement—and
the existing penalties provide Treasury with ample tools to address situations of
perceived abuse.
This proposal would create considerable uncertainties for taxpayers determining
whether disclosure is required. Consider, for example, the requirement to disclose
transactions that are reported differently from their form. Does ‘‘form’’ refer to the
label given to the transaction or instrument, or does it refer to the rights and liabil-
ities set forth in the documentation? For example, if an instrument is labeled debt,
but has features in the documentation typically associated with an equity interest,
is the form debt or equity? What if the taxpayer reasonably believed that it was re-
porting the transaction in accordance with its ‘‘form,’’ but later interpretations of
‘‘form’’ suggested that it had not so reported the transaction?
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00118 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
115
45The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters, supra n.1, at 114.
46 46. JCT study, supra, n.2.
It appears that the proposal would require disclosure for a number of other com-
mon and legitimate corporate business transactions. For example, the requirement
to disclose transactions and arrangements with a significant book/tax difference
would sweep in a wide range of non-abusive transactions. (See also our comments,
below, on the JCT staff’s disclosure requirements.)
4. Promoters
Summary
The proposal would impose a 25-percent excise tax on fees received in connection
with promoting or rendering tax advice related to corporate tax shelters. Treasury
also notes that an alternative might be to amend current-law penalties applicable
to promoters and advisors under sections 6700, 6701, and 6703.
Comment
The imprecise definition of a corporate tax shelter transaction contained in this
and related Treasury proposals would make it difficult for professional tax advisers
to determine the circumstances under which this provision would apply. The sub-
stantive burdens of interpreting and complying with the statute and the administra-
tive problems that taxpayers and the IRS would face cannot be overstated. The cre-
ation of the new excise tax would subject tax advisers to an entirely new and bur-
densome tax regime that again shifts the focus away from the substantive tax as-
pects of the transaction to unrelated definitional issues.
5. ‘‘Tax-indifferent’’ parties
Summary
Treasury would retain its proposal to tax income allocable to a ‘‘tax-indifferent’’
party with respect to a corporate tax shelter, but notes that certain modifications
would be necessary to narrow the scope of its proposal.
Comment
Treasury itself now concedes that its proposal ‘‘may be difficult to administer and
may only represent an additional penalty on the corporate participant (because the
tax-indifferent party is not subject to U.S. taxing jurisdiction). . . .’’ 45
This overreaching Treasury proposal cannot be justified on any tax policy
grounds. The proposal ignores the fact that many businesses operating in the global
economy are not U.S. taxpayers, and that in the global economy it is increasingly
necessary and common for U.S. companies to enter into transactions with such enti-
ties. The fact that a tax-exempt person earns income that would be taxable if in-
stead it had been earned by a taxable entity surely cannot in and of itself be viewed
as objectionable.
Moreover, as it applies to foreign persons in particular, the proposal is overbroad
in two significant respects. First, treating foreign persons as tax-indifferent ignores
the fact that in many circumstances they may be subject to significant U.S. tax, ei-
ther because they are subject to the withholding tax rules, because they are engaged
in a U.S. trade or business, or because their income is taxable currently to their
U.S. shareholders. Second, limiting the collection of the tax to parties other than
treaty-protected foreign persons does not hide the fact that the tax-indifferent party
tax would constitute a significant treaty override.
B. Joint Committee on Taxation Staff Recommendations
JCT staff proposals on ‘‘corporate tax shelters’’ were included in a 300-page study
reviewing the interest and penalty provisions of the Code.46 The following are brief
summaries of the JCT staff proposals, followed by our comments:
1. Definition of ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’
Summary
The JCT staff recommends ‘‘clarifying’’ the definition of a corporate tax shelter for
purposes of the understatement penalty with the addition of several ‘‘tax shelter in-
dicators.’’ A partnership or other entity, a plan, or an arrangement would be consid-
ered (with respect to a corporate participant) to have a significant purpose of avoid-
ance or evasion of federal income tax if it is described by at least one of the fol-
lowing indicators:
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00119 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
116
• The reasonably expected pre-tax profit from the arrangement is insignificant
relative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits.
• q The arrangement involves a ‘‘tax-indifferent party,’’ and the arrangement (1)
results in taxable income materially in excess of economic income to the tax-indif-
ferent participant, (2) permits a corporate participant to characterize items of in-
come, gain, loss, deductions, or credits in a more favorable manner than it otherwise
could without the involvement of the tax-indifferent participant, or (3) results in a
noneconomic increase, creation, multiplication, or shifting of basis for the benefit of
the corporate participant, and results in the recognition of income or gain that is
not subject to federal income tax because the tax consequences are borne by the tax-
indifferent party.
• The reasonably expected net tax benefits are significant, and the arrangement
involves a tax indemnity or similar agreement for the benefit of the corporate partic-
ipant other than a customary indemnity agreement in an acquisition or other busi-
ness transaction entered into with a principal in the transaction.
• The reasonably expected net tax benefits are significant, and the arrangement
is reasonably expected to create a ‘‘permanent difference’’ under GAAP.
• The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are significant,
and the arrangement is designed so that the corporate participant incurs little (if
any) additional economic risk as a result of entering into the arrangement.
Under the JCT staff proposal, an entity, plan, or arrangement still could be treat-
ed as a tax shelter even if it does not display any of the tax shelter indicators, pro-
vided that a significant purpose is the avoidance or evasion of federal income tax.
Comment
Rather than ‘‘clarify’’ the existing definition of a corporate tax shelter for purposes
of the penalty, the JCT staff recommendation would layer on top of that already
vague definition a test based on the existence of any one of five so-called ‘‘indica-
tors’’—each of which itself would introduce new, subjective tests. The first indicator,
for example, would require the taxpayer (and the IRS) to analyze whether the ‘‘rea-
sonably expected’’ pre-tax profit from a transaction is ‘‘insignificant’’ relative to the
‘‘reasonably expected’’ net tax benefits—and these determinations, in turn, must be
based on ‘‘reasonable assumptions and determinations.’’
A multitude of common, legitimate corporate business transactions that do not
have a significant purpose of tax avoidance nevertheless would be treated as cor-
porate tax shelters if deemed to exhibit just one of the five ‘‘indicators.’’ Conversely,
even if an arrangement has no indicator of shelter status, it still could be treated
as a shelter under the existing ‘‘significant purpose’’ definition. The five indicators
raise a number of concerns and questions:
• The ‘‘profit vs. benefit’’ indicator, which uses such vague terms as ‘‘reasonably
expected,’’ ‘‘arrangement,’’ and ‘‘insignificant,’’ could taint as tax shelters many types
of inherently risky corporate ventures, such as wildcat oil-drilling, basic research
partnerships where profit projections necessarily are uncertain, and some real es-
tate investments by REITs, as well as investments encouraged by the tax law that
do not produce profits, such as cleanups of brownfield sites.
• The ‘‘tax-indifferent party’’ indicator ignores the fact that to compete in a global
economy, U.S. businesses must engage in arrangements with foreign entities. Sub-
jecting these transactions to an economic profit test would further complicate U.S.
tax-law treatment of cross-border transactions.
• The ‘‘indemnity agreement’’ indicator would punish a corporation that prudently
engages a tax practitioner to analyze a planned transaction where the practitioner
is confident enough to stand behind the opinion with an indemnity or similar agree-
ment.
• The ‘‘permanent difference’’ indicator could call into question transactions that
the Code explicitly seeks to encourage, e.g., through augmented charitable deduc-
tions for certain contributions of inventory property, on the ground that there would
be a permanent difference under GAAP.
• The ‘‘economic risk’’ indicator seems to taint ordinary business decisions as to
operating structures as ‘‘shelter’’ activities merely because the business decision re-
sults in lower ultimate tax liability than alternative choices. These types of deci-
sions, such as choosing a form of business or organizing tiers of subsidiaries, may
not involve economic risk.
As a result of these layers of complexity, businesses and their tax advisors would
be unable to determine with any confidence whether transactions entered into for
strategic business reasons could trigger harsh penalties if later viewed as having ei-
ther just one ‘‘indicator’’ of shelter status or a ‘‘significant’’ tax avoidance purpose.
This problem would be aggravated by the JCT staff recommendation to eliminate
the reasonable cause exception to the understatement penalty.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00120 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
117
2. Substantial understatement penalty
Summary
The understatement penalty rate would be increased from 20 percent to 40 per-
cent for any understatement that is attributable to a corporate tax shelter. The 40-
percent penalty would be reduced to 20 percent if certain required disclosures are
made, provided the taxpayer had substantial authority in support of its position.
The JCT staff proposal also would eliminate the present-law reasonable cause ex-
ception and prohibit the IRS from waiving the penalty.
The 40-percent penalty could be abated completely if (1) the taxpayer establishes
that it was at least 75 percent sure that its tax treatment would be sustained on
the merits and (2) the taxpayer discloses certain information (discussed further
below) that is certified by the chief financial officer or another senior corporate offi-
cer with knowledge of the facts.
A corporate participant that must pay an understatement penalty of at least $1
million in connection with a corporate tax shelter would be required to disclose the
penalty payment to its shareholders, including the facts causing imposition of the
penalty.
Comment
The stunning complexity of the JCT staff penalty recommendations can be seen
in the JCT staff’s own chart (attached hereto as Appendix 6) seeking to explain the
various permutations and combinations of factors that can result in penalty rates
of zero, 20 percent, and 40 percent.
The JCT staff recommendations include eliminating the present-law reasonable
cause exception. Treasury itself already has backed away from its original proposal
to eliminate the exception. The narrow abatement procedure proposed by JCT staff
would be available only where a business could establish that it had been ‘‘highly
confident’’ (75 percent) of prevailing in its position that any reliance on a third-party
opinion was ‘‘reasonable,’’ that no ‘‘unreasonable’’ assumptions were made in the
opinion, and that the transaction had a ‘‘material’’ nontax business purpose. Thus,
the new 40-percent penalty rate could apply (absent satisfying the proposed disclo-
sure requirements) even if a taxpayer established that it had substantial authority
for its position, that it had a greater than 50 percent (but not at least 75 percent)
likelihood of prevailing, and that it had reasonable cause. It is unclear how a tax-
payer would be able to support a 75-percent degree of confidence with respect to a
transaction successfully challenged by the IRS. The JCT staff proposals are incon-
sistent with the acknowledged purpose of tax code penalties, namely, to encourage
voluntary compliance by taxpayers rather than to serve as a punitive weapon wield-
ed by the IRS.
The JCT staff recommendation that companies must disclose to shareholders pay-
ment of shelter penalties of $1 million or more—given the factors mentioned
above—would be a highly inappropriate use of the tax statute. It is noteworthy that
the proposal would require disclosure of a payment even if the company is chal-
lenging the penalty assessment in court.
3. Disclosure
Summary
For arrangements that are described by one of the ‘‘tax shelter indicators’’ and
in which the expected net tax benefits are at least $1 million, corporations would
have to satisfy certain disclosure requirements within 30 days of entering into the
arrangement. This disclosure would have to include a summary of the relevant facts
and assumptions, the expected net tax benefits, the applicability of any tax shelter
indicator, the arrangement’s analysis and legal rationale, the business purpose, and
the existence of any contingent fee arrangements. The CFO or another senior cor-
porate officer with knowledge of the facts would be required to certify, under pen-
alties of perjury, that the disclosure statements are true, accurate, and complete.
Disclosure of tax shelter arrangements also would be required on the company’s
tax return, regardless of the amount of net tax benefits.
Comment
The recommended double disclosure requirements (at the time of the transaction
and in the taxpayer’s return) would be onerous and unnecessary. This flood of docu-
ments under the 30-day requirement would defeat the cited ‘‘early warning’’ pur-
pose, since under the vague definitions of the proposal the IRS would receive so
many documents it would have great difficulty processing and identifying those
transactions it might want to examine. The proposed exceptions for certain arrange-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00121 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
118
ments already reported on specific forms would apply only after regulations are
issued—given that Treasury has yet to publish regulations under the 1997 tax shel-
ter registration provision, the exceptions might never be triggered.
The breadth of the JCT staff’s shelter recommendations can be seen by its state-
ment that a mere purchase or sale of one asset, in and of itself, does not constitute
an ‘‘arrangement.’’ This statement is indicative of the overwhelming volume of guid-
ance that would be necessary to implement and administer this proposal. These de-
terminations would plunge businesses and their tax advisers deeper into an abyss
of unfathomable terminology and complexity.
4. ‘‘Promoter’’ provisions
Summary
The JCT staff document includes a number of recommendations affecting other
parties involved in ‘‘corporate tax shelters,’’ including an expansion of the aiding
and abetting penalty.
Comment
Having proposed a 75-percent likelihood-of-success threshold for avoiding the 40-
percent penalty rate in certain situations—thereby virtually forcing businesses to
obtain outside tax advice as to the proper treatment of transactions—the JCT staff
recommendation next proposes imposing an ‘‘aiding and abetting’’ penalty on the
practitioner giving the opinion if an understatement results and a so-called ‘‘reason-
able practitioner’’ would have rendered a different opinion. No definition of a ‘‘rea-
sonable practitioner’’ is provided.
The JCT staff proposal would allow the practitioner being penalized a ‘‘meaning-
ful opportunity’’ to present evidence on his or her behalf. Should this evidence not
sway the IRS, the practitioner would be penalized in an amount equal to the greater
of $100,000 or one-half his or her fees, the practitioner’s name would be published
by the IRS, and the IRS would forward the practitioner’s name to State licensing
authorities ‘‘for possible disciplinary sanctions.’’ These harsh provisions seem aimed
at thwarting companies from seeking tax opinions as to the appropriate treatment
of business transactions and arrangements, while also penalizing them if they do
not.
5. Tax shelter registration requirements
Summary
The JCT staff recommends modifying the present-law rules regarding the reg-
istration of corporate tax shelters by (1) deleting the confidentiality requirement, (2)
increasing the fee threshold from $100,000 to $1 million (in this respect, loosening
the present-law requirement), and (3) expanding the scope of the registration re-
quirement to cover any corporate tax shelter that is reasonably expected to be pre-
sented to more than one participant. Additional information reporting would be re-
quired with respect to arrangements covered by a tax shelter indicator.
Comment
The JCT staff recommendations would modify a legislative provision requiring
registration that was enacted in 1997, but that has not become effective because
Treasury has not issued implementing regulations. Before recommending further
changes to the law relating to registration issues, Treasury should issue guidance
on the existing registration requirements, which were enacted in 1997.
C. ‘‘Abusive Tax Shelter Shutdown Act of 1999’’
Rep. Lloyd Doggett (D–TX) introduced on June 17, 1999, the ‘‘Abusive Tax Shelter
Shutdown Act of 1999’’ (H.R. 2255), which includes several proposals that essen-
tially follow Treasury’s initial recommendations to disallow tax benefits for ‘‘cor-
porate tax shelters’’ and to increase the substantial understatement penalty.
Our comments above on Treasury’s proposals apply with equal force to H.R. 2255.
If anything, the H.R. 2255 proposal disallowing ‘‘noneconomic tax attributes’’ would
introduce even greater uncertainty by using terms such as ‘‘meaningful changes,’’
‘‘economic position,’’ and ‘‘substantial value.’’ This proposal would create tremendous
uncertainty for companies following prudent tax planning in implementing business
strategies in a global marketplace. Similarly, the H.R. 2255 penalty proposals (like
those of Treasury) are overbroad, unnecessary, and punitive.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00122 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
119
IV. CONCLUSION
It is respectfully submitted that Congress should reject the broad legislative pro-
posals regarding ‘‘corporate tax shelters’’ that have been advanced by the Treasury
Department, the JCT staff, and others.
The revenue and economic data indicate no need for these radical changes. Fur-
ther, the proposals are completely unnecessary in light of the array of legislative,
regulatory, administrative, and judicial tools available to curtail perceived abuses.
Finally, these proposals would create an unacceptably high level of uncertainty and
burdens for corporate tax officials while potentially imposing penalties on legitimate
transactions undertaken in the ordinary course of business. Proponents of this type
of sweeping legislation have not demonstrated that these proposals are necessary
or advisable in our corporate tax system.
APPENDIX 1
Corporate Income Tax Receipts, FY 1980–1999
[Billions of current dollars]
Fiscal year GDP
Federal corporate
income tax re-
ceipts
Corporate tax re-
ceipts as a per-
cent of GDP
1980 ............................................................................................................ $2,719 $64.6 2.4%
1981 ............................................................................................................ $3,048 $61.1 2.0%
1982 ............................................................................................................ $3,214 $49.2 1.5%
1983 ............................................................................................................ $3,423 $37.0 1.1%
1984 ............................................................................................................ $3,819 $56.9 1.5%
1985 ............................................................................................................ $4,109 $61.3 1.5%
1986 ............................................................................................................ $4,368 $63.1 1.4%
1987 ............................................................................................................ $4,609 $83.9 1.8%
1988 ............................................................................................................ $4,957 $94.5 1.9%
1989 ............................................................................................................ $5,356 $103.3 1.9%
1990 ............................................................................................................ $5,683 $93.5 1.6%
1991 ............................................................................................................ $5,862 $98.1 1.7%
1992 ............................................................................................................ $6,149 $100.3 1.6%
1993 ............................................................................................................ $6,478 $117.5 1.8%
1994 ............................................................................................................ $6,849 $140.4 2.1%
1995 ............................................................................................................ $7,194 $157.0 2.2%
1996 ............................................................................................................ $7,533 $171.8 2.3%
1997 ............................................................................................................ $7,972 $182.3 2.3%
1998 ............................................................................................................ $8,404 $188.7 2.2%
1999 ............................................................................................................ $8,851 $184.7 2.1%
Period averages:
1980–99 ................................................................................................. $5,529.9 $105.5 1.9%
1980–82 ................................................................................................. $2,993.7 $58.3 1.9%
1983–85 ................................................................................................. $3,783.7 $51.7 1.4%
1986–89 ................................................................................................. $4,822.5 $86.2 1.8%
1990–92 ................................................................................................. $5,898.0 $97.3 1.6%
1993–99 ................................................................................................. $7,611.6 $163.2 2.1%
AASources: Congressional Budget Office, Historical Budget Data, The Economic and Budget Outlook: Fiscal Years 2000–2009, released Janu-
ary 1999.
AACongressional Budget Office, The Economic and Budget Outlook: An Update, July 1999. U.S. Treasury Department, Monthly Treasury State-
ment, October 1999 and earlier issues.
APPENDIX 2
Federal Corporate Tax Liability and Receipts, 1980–1999
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year Federal corp. taxliability 1
Federal corp. income tax receipts
Gross Refunds Net
1980 ............................................................................... $58.6 $72.0 $8.6 $63.4
1981 ............................................................................... $51.7 $75.1 $13.4 $61.7
1982 ............................................................................... $33.9 $63.5 $19.5 $44.0
1983 ............................................................................... $47.1 $64.6 $22.7 $41.9
1984 ............................................................................... $59.1 $75.5 $16.9 $58.6
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00123 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
120
Federal Corporate Tax Liability and Receipts, 1980–1999—Continued
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year Federal corp. taxliability 1
Federal corp. income tax receipts
Gross Refunds Net
1985 ............................................................................... $58.5 $78.7 $16.1 $62.6
1986 ............................................................................... $66.0 $84.1 $17.8 $66.3
1987 ............................................................................... $85.5 $105.2 $18.0 $87.2
1988 ............................................................................... $93.6 $114.4 $16.0 $98.5
1989 ............................................................................... $95.5 $113.9 $14.1 $99.8
1990 ............................................................................... $94.4 $112.9 $15.9 $96.9
1991 ............................................................................... $89.0 $112.9 $16.6 $96.4
1992 ............................................................................... $101.8 $119.7 $16.6 $103.1
1993 ............................................................................... $122.3 $137.3 $13.7 $123.6
1994 ............................................................................... $136.2 $158.9 $14.7 $144.2
1995 ............................................................................... $155.9 $180.4 $17.9 $162.5
1996 ............................................................................... $172.9 $191.8 $19.8 $172.1
1997 ............................................................................... $189.5 $211.1 $19.8 $191.3
1998 ............................................................................... $183.2 $213.5 $28.5 $185.0
1999 2 ............................................................................. $198.0
1999 3 ............................................................................. $216.4 $31.8 $184.6
1 Determined from the National Income and Product Accounts as profits before tax (domestic basis) minus profits of the Federal Reserve
Banks minus state and local income taxes. See text for details.
1 Figure is seasonally adjusted at an annual rate based on first six months of the year.
3 Figures are seasonally adjusted at annual rates based on first nine months of the year.
AASources: U.S. Commerce Dept., Bureau of Economic Association, Survey of Current Business, October, 1999.
AAU.S. Treasury Department, Monthly Treasury Summary, October 1999 and earlier issues. PwC calculations.
APPENDIX 3
Effective Corporate Tax Rate, NIPA, 1980–1999
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year GDP
Corp. profits
before tax
(BEA adj.1
Federal corp.
tax liability
(BEA adj.)
Federal corp.
tax liability
(BEA adj.) as
a percent of
corp. profits
before tax
Corp. profits
before tax
(BEA adj.) as
a percent of
GDP
1980 ...................................................................... $2,784.2 $200.8 $58.6 29.2% 7.2%
1981 ...................................................................... $3,115.9 $193.6 $51.7 26.7% 6.2%
1982 ...................................................................... $3,242.1 $142.9 $33.9 23.7% 4.4%
1983 ...................................................................... $3,514.5 $181.1 $47.1 26.0% 5.2%
1984 ...................................................................... $3,902.4 $212.3 $59.1 27.8% 5.4%
1985 ...................................................................... $4,180.7 $215.4 $58.5 27.2% 5.2%
1986 ...................................................................... $4,422.2 $238.0 $66.0 27.7% 5.4%
1987 ...................................................................... $4,692.3 $255.9 $85.5 33.4% 5.5%
1988 ...................................................................... $5,049.6 $305.2 $93.6 30.7% 6.0%
1989 ...................................................................... $5,438.7 $290.0 $95.5 32.9% 5.3%
1990 ...................................................................... $5,743.8 $281.1 $94.4 33.6% 4.9%
1991 ...................................................................... $5,916.7 $287.3 $89.0 31.0% 4.9%
1992 ...................................................................... $6,244.4 $317.8 $101.8 32.0% 5.1%
1993 ...................................................................... $6,558.1 $369.5 $122.3 33.1% 5.6%
1994 ...................................................................... $6,947.0 $399.5 $136.2 34.1% 5.8%
1995 ...................................................................... $7,269.6 $499.9 $155.9 31.2% 6.9%
1996 ...................................................................... $7,661.6 $537.6 $172.9 32.2% 7.0%
1997 ...................................................................... $8,110.9 $559.7 $189.5 33.9% 6.9%
1998 ...................................................................... $8,511.0 $587.3 $183.2 31.2% 6.9%
1999 2 .................................................................... $8,873.4 $603.4 $197.5 32.7% 6.8%
Period averages:
1980–99 ........................................................... $5,609.0 $333.9 $104.6 31.3% 6.0%
1980–82 ........................................................... $3,047.4 $179.1 $48.1 26.8% 5.9%
1983–85 ........................................................... $3,865.9 $203.0 $54.9 27.1% 5.2%
1986–86 ........................................................... $4,900.7 $272.3 $85.1 31.3% 5.6%
1990–92 ........................................................... $5,968.3 $295.4 $95.1 32.2% 4.9%
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00124 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
121
Effective Corporate Tax Rate, NIPA, 1980–1999—Continued
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year GDP
Corp. profits
before tax
(BEA adj.1
Federal corp.
tax liability
(BEA adj.)
Federal corp.
tax liability
(BEA adj.) as
a percent of
corp. profits
before tax
Corp. profits
before tax
(BEA adj.) as
a percent of
GDP
1993–99 ........................................................... $7,704.5 $508.1 $165.4 32.5% 6.6%
1 Figures for 1997–1999 are based on CBO fiscal year projections. Because actual corporate capital gains data were not available for
1980–82, imputations were used.
2 Figures for 1999 are annualized based on first six months, seasonally adjusted.
AASources: U.S. Commerce Department, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business, October 1999.
AAU.S. Treasury Department, Monthly Treasury Summary, October 1999. PwC Calculations
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00125 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
122
Appendix 4
U.S. Corporate Income Tax Liability per Audited Financial Statements, 1988–1998
[Dollar amounts in billions; Tax years ending after May of indicated year, and before July of following year]
Item 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 96Aug 97Aug 98Aug Avg’88–97
A. Companies with foreign operations
U.S. fed. inc. tax liability 1 ............................................................................................................................ $25 $24 $25 $23 $23 $27 $34 $41 $42 $48 $19 $22 $24 $31
U.S. oper. inc. after state inc. tax ................................................................................................................ $127 $144 $138 $123 $128 $149 $181 $222 $231 $234 $89 $103 $105 $168
U.S. assets ..................................................................................................................................................... $1,408 $1,587 $1,753 $1,904 $1,996 $1,988 $2,310 $2,433 $2,595 $2,494 $905 $1,050 $1,071 $2,047
U.S. revenues ................................................................................................................................................. $1,063 $1,212 $1,313 $1,371 $1,423 $1,373 $1,529 $1,745 $1,794 $1,770 $736 $817 $841 $1,459
U.S. fed. inc. tax liability as % of:
U.S. oper. inc. after state inc. tax ........................................................................................................... 19.9% 16.6% 18.2% 19.1% 18.3% 18.2% 19.0% 18.3% 18.4% 20.7% 21.7% 21.4% 22.6% 18.7%
U.S. assets ................................................................................................................................................ 1.8% 1.5% 1.4% 1.2% 1.2% 1.4% 1.5% 1.7% 1.6% 1.9% 2.1% 2.1% 2.2% 1.5%
U.S. revenues ............................................................................................................................................ 2.4% 2.0% 1.9% 1.7% 1.6% 2.0% 2.2% 2.3% 2.4% 2.7% 2.6% 2.7% 2.8% 2.2%
Number of corps. ........................................................................................................................................... 700 746 806 886 963 820 934 1,057 1,159 1,178 633 633 633 925
B. Companies without foreign operations
U.S. fed. inc. tax liability 1 ............................................................................................................................ $17 $19 $20 $23 $24 $22 $25 $27 $29 $29 $24 $26 $29 $24
U.S. oper. inc. after state inc. tax ................................................................................................................ $106 $116 $118 $123 $136 $115 $130 $149 $157 $157 $131 $144 $150 $131
U.S. assets ..................................................................................................................................................... $1,332 $1,488 $1,570 $1,658 $1,825 $1,627 $2,061 $2,295 $2,526 $2,676 $2,124 $2,493 $2,907 $1,906
U.S. revenues ................................................................................................................................................. $913 $1,016 $1,117 $1,182 $1,286 $1,079 $1,252 $1,398 $1,509 $1,564 $1,214 $1,403 $1,593 $1,232
U.S. fed. inc. tax liability as % of:
U.S. oper. inc. after state inc. tax ................................................................................................................ 15.7% 16.3% 17.3% 18.4% 18.0% 19.2% 19.6% 18.2% 18.7% 18.6% 18.1% 18.0% 19.4% 18.1%
.S. assets .................................................................................................................................................. 1.2% 1.3% 1.3% 1.4% 1.3% 1.4% 1.2% 1.2% 1.2% 1.1% 1.1% 1.0% 1.0% 1.2%
U.S. revenues ............................................................................................................................................ 1.8% 1.9% 1.8% 1.9% 1.9% 2.1% 2.0% 1.9% 1.9% 1.9% 2.0% 1.9% 1.8% 1.9%
Number of corps. ........................................................................................................................................... 3,681 3,573 3,646 3,731 3,945 3,696 3,847 4,209 4,249 4,052 3,357 3,357 3,357 3,863
C. Companies with and without foreign operations
U.S. fed. inc. tax liability 1 ............................................................................................................................ $42 $43 $45 $46 $48 $49 $60 $68 $72 $78 $43 $48 $53 $55
U.S. oper. inc. after state inc. tax ................................................................................................................ $233 $261 $256 $246 $264 $264 $310 $372 $387 $391 $220 $247 $256 $298
U.S. assets ..................................................................................................................................................... $2,740 $3,075 $3,323 $3,562 $3,821 $3,615 $4,371 $4,727 $5,120 $5,171 $3,030 $3,543 $3,978 $3,952
U.S. revenues ................................................................................................................................................. $1,976 $2,228 $2,430 $2,553 $2,709 $2,452 $2,781 $3,143 $3,302 $3,332 $1,950 $2,220 $2,434 $2,691
U.S. fed. inc. tax liability as % of:
U.S. oper. inc. after state inc. tax ........................................................................................................... 18.0% 16.5% 17.8% 18.8% 18.2% 18.7% 19.2% 18.3% 18.5% 19.9% 19.6% 19.4% 20.7% 18.5%
U.S. assets ................................................................................................................................................ 1.5% 1.4% 1.4% 1.3% 1.3% 1.4% 1.4% 1.4% 1.4% 1.5% 1.4% 1.4% 1.3% 1.4%
U.S. revenues ............................................................................................................................................ 2.1% 1.9% 1.9% 1.8% 1.8% 2.0% 2.1% 2.2% 2.2% 2.3% 2.2% 2.2% 2.2% 2.0%
Number of corps. ........................................................................................................................................... 4,381 4,319 4,452 4,617 4,908 4,516 4,781 5,266 5,408 5,230 3,990 3,990 3,990 4,788
AACurrent provision for tax.
AASource: Standard and Poors, Compustat, September 1999; PwC calculations.
VerD
ate 20-JUL-2000
13:12 Jan 11, 2001
Jkt 060010
PO
 00000
Frm
 00126
Fm
t 6633
Sfm
t 6602
K:\HEARING
S\66992.TXT
W
AYS1
PsN
: W
AYS1
123
APPENDIX 5
Net Capital Gains for All Active Corporations, 1980–1996
[Excluding RICs in Billions of dollars]
Year
Net gain on capital assets
Net short-term
gain less net
long-term loss
Net long-term
gain less net
short-term loss
Subtotal
1980 ............................................................................................................ 1.4 22.1 23.5
1981 ............................................................................................................ 1.7 25.6 27.3
1982 ............................................................................................................ 1.9 24.1 26.0
1983 ............................................................................................................ 2.7 28.4 31.1
1984 ............................................................................................................ 2.4 35.1 37.6
1985 ............................................................................................................ 4.3 45.9 50.2
1986 ............................................................................................................ 8.2 74.2 82.4
1987 ............................................................................................................ 4.4 54.5 58.9
1988 ............................................................................................................ 4.0 56.7 60.7
1989 ............................................................................................................ 6.0 62.5 68.5
1990 ............................................................................................................ 2.9 43.4 46.3
1991 ............................................................................................................ 7.1 41.1 48.2
1992 ............................................................................................................ 7.9 45.1 53.0
1993 ............................................................................................................ 10.8 53.3 64.1
1994 ............................................................................................................ 2.4 47.9 50.3
1995 ............................................................................................................ 10.0 60.9 70.8
1996 ............................................................................................................ 6.6 75.2 81.8
Source: IRS. Corporate Source Book, various issues.
APPENDIX 6
Arrangements with a ‘‘Significant Purpose’’ of Avoidance or Evasion of Tax and Resulting in an
Understatement for Corporate Taxpayers
Highest standard met Described by an indicator
Disclosure re-
quirements sat-
isfied
Penalty under
present law
Penalty under
staff rec-
ommendation
Highly Confident .............................................. Yes ............................... Yes 0 0
Highly Confident .............................................. Yes ............................... No 0 40%
Highly Confident .............................................. No ................................. Deemed* 0 0
More Likely Than Not ....................................... Yes ............................... Yes 0 20
More Likely Than Not ....................................... Yes ............................... No 0 40
More Likely Than Not ....................................... No ................................. Deemed* 0 20
Substantial Authority ....................................... Yes ............................... Yes 20 20
Substantial Authority ....................................... Yes ............................... No 20 40
Substantial Authority ....................................... No ................................. Yes** 20 20
Substantial Authority ....................................... No ................................. No** 20 40
Less Than Substantial Authority: All Cases ... ...................................... ........................ 20% 40%
AA* Under the Joint Committee staff recommendations, a transaction that is Not described by an indicator is Not a ‘‘reportable trans-
action.’’ Therefore, to the extent that a ‘‘more likely than Not’’ or higher standard has been satisfied, there is No special tax shelter disclo-
sure or general section 6662(d)(2)(B) return disclosure required in order to reduce penalties.
AA** These transactions would Not be ‘‘reportable transactions’’ to which the special corporate tax shelter disclosures apply. Under the
Joint Committee staff recommendations, however, transactions that are Not described by a tax shelter indicator nevertheless must satisfy the
new, higher section 6662 reporting standards that are recommended in Part VII.G., above. Therefore, if the highest standard satisfied by a
transaction is substantial authority, general tax return disclosure rules (i.e., sec. 6662(d)(2)(B) and Treas. Reg. sec. 1.6662–3(c)(2)) must be
satisfied in order to abate the penalty, even if the special corporate tax shelter disclosure requirements do Not apply. Thus, the disclosure in-
dicated in the boxes accompanying this footnote actually refers to the section 6662(d)(2)(B) disclosure and Not corporate tax shelter disclo-
sure.
AAKey
AAHighly Confident:—75 percent or greater likelihood of success on the merits if challenged.
AAMore Likely than Not:—Greater than 50 percent likelihood (but less than highly confident) of success on the merits if challenged.
AASubstantial Authority:—Less than more likely than Not, but greater than reasonable basis.
f
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Hariton, you may proceed.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00127 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
124
STATEMENT OF DAVID P. HARITON, PARTNER, SULLIVAN &
CROMWELL, NEW YORK, NEW YORK
Mr. HARITON. Thank you very much. I don’t have Mr. Kies’ expe-
rience, so I may not time it so perfectly. My name is David
Hariton. I am a tax lawyer practicing in New York, and my prac-
tice deals with the taxation of complex business transactions. I
have done a lot of thinking about these issues. I have written about
these issues, and I am speaking here strictly on my own behalf and
for the benefit of the Government and the Treasury Department.
And I say what I am about to say now with the greatest appre-
ciation and gratitude for everyone who has spent time trying to
deal with this problem, especially Representative Doggett and his
staff. I have concluded that the most constructive response that
Congress could make would be to grant the Commissioner addi-
tional financial resources to deal with complex business trans-
actions.
And if we are going to have a statutory response, it really can’t
be one that is based on some definition of abusive tax transactions.
That is just hopeless. At most, it might be one that is designed to
shift the balance, like an increase in the penalty for understate-
ments arising from corporate tax shelters.
Now, I have already set out in various articles the issues that I
think would have to be addressed before we could develop any sort
of coherent language to define corporate tax shelter, and I would
be glad to assist the government in the effort if I was called upon.
I must tell you frankly, though, that I really think there is little
to be gained from such language. The law in this area is very com-
plex, and the transactions to which the law applies are even more
complex. And when you are talking about the application of the
former to the latter, that is as unique and case-specific as any par-
ticular chess game. That is why we have hundreds of pages of a
court decision trying to explain a particular transaction.
And any string of words that purports to define bad transactions
and distinguish them from good ones is going to be ignored as func-
tionally meaningless and impossible to apply or even comprehend.
At most, I think it would cast a shadow of confusion over the objec-
tive rules that determine tax liabilities.
Besides, to be honest, I am not persuaded that such a definition
is necessary. I think that the courts have made it quite clear that
they will not permit sophisticated taxpayers to reap the unjust ben-
efits of strictly tax-motivated transactions. The Commissioner has
enough judicial doctrines at his disposal to successfully challenge
any taxpayer that seeks to take unfair advantage of his rules. The
problem really is not that the Commissioner has litigated and lost.
In other words, I don’t think this is a job for law. This is a job
for administration. And an increase in the volume of law instead
of in the volume and quality of enforcement is not going to accom-
plish very much.
It is administration, not law, that can apply analytical reasoning
to specific transactions. Administration, not law, can distinguish le-
gitimate transactions from abusive ones. Laws don’t think, people
do; and I think we would be foolish to suppose that we could draft
a definition to do our thinking for us.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00128 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
125
Now, having said that, I must say that I have a great deal of
sympathy for the Commissioner’s complaint that he is outmanned
and ill-equipped to deal with this problem. In order to deal ade-
quately with complex tax motivated transactions, the Commis-
sioner has got to be proactive, energetic and efficient; yet at the
same time, he has got to be fair, judicious, reflective, cerebral. How
is he supposed to hire a staff to accomplish all of these tasks with
a limited budget and a government salary cap?
Is it a surprise to learn that he may be losing tens, even hun-
dreds of billions of dollars? I have to say, for me at least, I think
that the way that we are dealing with our own Treasury Depart-
ment may be pennywise and pound foolish.
Now, I do realize that some people are concerned about the prob-
lems that the little guy faces in dealing with the IRS. But obviously
we are not talking about the little guy here. These are transactions
entered into by large corporations and wealthy individuals. Isn’t it
possible for Congress to grant the Commissioner special financial
resources and tell them not to use them to prosecute the little guy,
but rather to deal energetically with complex tax motivated trans-
actions?
And I think you should also find some way to let the Commis-
sioner pay his staff more. The Commissioner is not going to be able
to handle complex business transactions if he can’t compete with
the private sector in hiring the best and the brightest. Does it
make sense to bind someone who is trying to collect our revenue
to the salary caps that are designed to save the government
money?
Anyway, thank you very much for your time. And I will say that
I am very glad that you are focusing on the taxation of complex
business transactions. I just hope that your concern will yield up
measures that are practical and efficacious, as opposed to just cere-
monial.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you, Mr. Hariton, and you did very
well by the time.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of David P. Hariton, Partner, Sullivan & Cromwell, New York,
New York
As a tax lawyer whose practice deals with complex business transactions, I hope
to offer a practical view on the problem which the Committee is now addressing.
I have concluded on reflection that the most constructive response that Congress
could make would be to grant the Commissioner additional financial resources to
deal with complex business transactions. If there is to be a statutory response, it
should not be one that places significant weight on a statutory definition of abusive
tax transactions. At most, it should be one designed to shift a perceived imbalance,
such as an increase in the penalty for understatements arising from corporate tax
shelters.
I have already endeavored to assist the government by setting out in published
articles the issues that must be considered in drafting statutory language to better
define the words ‘‘corporate tax shelter,’’ and I would be glad to continue that assist-
ance if called upon. I must tell you frankly, however, that there is little to be gained
by enacting legislation that purports to describe bad transactions and distinguish
them from good ones. The law in this area is exceedingly complex, the transactions
to which the law applies are even more so, and application of the former to the lat-
ter is as unique and case-specific as any particular chess game. Laws which purport
to define bad transactions are likely to be ignored as functionally meaningless—im-
possible to apply or even comprehend. At most, they will do damage by casting a
shadow of confusion over the primarily objective rules that determine tax liabilities.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00129 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
126
Moreover, I am not persuaded that such laws are necessary. A series of recent
decisions clearly demonstrates that the courts will not permit sophisticated tax-
payers to reap the unjust benefits of strictly tax-motivated transactions. The case
law has sufficient judicial doctrines to permit the Commissioner to successfully chal-
lenge taxpayers that seek to take unfair advantage of his rules. The problem is not
that the Commissioner has litigated and lost.
In other words, this is not a job for law. This is a job for administration. I fear
that a decision to increase the volume of law instead of the volume and quality of
enforcement will accomplish nothing constructive. It is administration, not law,
which can apply analytic reasoning to specific transactions and perform the all-im-
portant task of distinguishing legitimate transactions from abusive ones. Laws don’t
think—people do—and we would be foolish to suppose that we could somehow draft
laws to do our thinking for us.
I am highly sympathetic, however, to the Commissioner’s complaint that he is
outmanned and ill-equipped to deal with the substantial increase in intellectual re-
sources that the private sector is now directing towards complex tax-motivated
transactions. To deal with the problem, his staff must be proactive, energetic and
efficient, yet at the same time judicious, fair, reflective and cerebral. How can the
Commissioner muster a staff to accomplish these tasks with his hands tied behind
his back? Is it any surprise that he is losing tens, perhaps hundreds, of billions of
dollars? The way we are dealing with our own Treasury is, to be frank, penny-wise
and pound-foolish.
I understand that some people are concerned about the problems that the little
guy faces in dealing with the IRS. The transactions we are discussing, however, are
entered into by large corporations and massively wealthy individuals. Surely it is
possible for Congress to grant the Commissioner special resources and direct that
he use them not to prosecute the little guy, but rather to deal energetically with
complex tax-motivated transactions.
I must stress, moreover, that it will not be enough for the Commissioner to hire
more people. When it comes to complex business transactions, the Commissioner
must compete with the private sector to hire the best and the brightest. Frankly,
how can he do this if he is bound by the salary caps which generally apply to all
government workers? Does it come as any surprise to learn that the Commissioner’s
staff has difficulty keeping up with people who earn ten times as much in the pri-
vate sector, or that when the Commissioner directs them to increase enforcement,
they wind up targeting legitimate business transactions while the transactions they
are really trying to stop elude their grasp? We cannot remedy the problem if we
insist upon being deaf and blind to mundane realities.
Thank you for your time. As a tax lawyer and an individual who recognizes how
much revenue is at stake, I hope you grow more, not less, concerned with the tax-
ation of complex business transactions. I merely hope that your concern will mani-
fest itself in measures that are practical and efficacious, as opposed to merely cere-
monial.
f
Chairman ARCHER. Dr. Sullivan.
STATEMENT OF MARTIN A. SULLIVAN, PH.D., ECONOMIST, TAX
ANALYSTS, ARLINGTON, VIRGINIA
Mr. SULLIVAN. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, Mr. McCrery, Mr.
Doggett. It is an honor for me to appear here today. My name is
Martin Sullivan, I am an economist. Anticipating a question from
you, everybody in our profession is upright and there are no ethical
conflicts, on the one hand.
I work for Tax Analysts, which is a nonprofit, nonpartisian orga-
nization in Arlington, Virginia. It is best known as the publisher
of Tax Notes Magazine, which I know you all read faithfully every
week, and I appreciate that.
I am honored to be here today. I really am trying to help. So let
me just go to what I know. Let me just tell you what I don’t know.
I don’t know anything about corporate tax shelters. It is way too
complex for me. In fact, I was trying not to learn about them at
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00130 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
127
all and avoid them, because they are too hard for a simple-minded
economist such as myself. But the data at the other end of the tele-
scope, if you will, just made it obvious I couldn’t avoid it anymore
or at least think about it a little bit.
For the fiscal year 1999 that ended on September 30th, the
Treasury Department collected $184 billion in receipts from the
corporation income tax. This is down 2.5 percent from the prior
year. I don’t have charts, I just have little pieces of paper. If you
would like to follow along with me, they are labeled chart 1, chart
2 and chart 3 in the testimony.
The question is, we see that corporate testimony receipts have
gone down this year. Is that a big deal? Is that something we
should be concerned about? Well, I don’t know definitely, but let us
just go through what the possibilities might be. Let us look at the
history. We have never had a decline in corporate tax receipts
before— we have only had it two times in the last 20 years; the
first time was in the early 1980s when we had a really big reces-
sion and a really big tax cut, so that makes senses. The only other
time was in 1990, when we had a smaller recession so that kind
of makes sense.
But right now we are not in the recession, as we all know and
are thankful for, and we haven’t had any big tax cuts. So in fact,
profits are up; if anything, we have had legislation where corporate
receipts are supposed to increase. Even the Chairman’s press re-
lease indicates $50 billion of extra receipts from corporations
should be expected over the last few years. We have had a rate in-
crease from 34 to 35 percent, ill-advised in my opinion, but never-
theless there as a result of the 1993 act.
So it is not legislation. It is not a recession. Why are corporate
tax receipts going down? Well, the next thing to look at is profits,
d that is what I did. If you look on chart 3, I sort of constructed
an effective tax rate. And again if you just look at the history, it
sort of makes sense. 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984, we had a big recession
and we had a big tax cut. Corporate profits go down. In 1987, re-
ceipts go up as a result of the Tax Reform Act of 1987.
In 1991, 1992, receipts are low, because of the recession. But
again you have this declining pattern starting around 1994. What
is it due to? I am not sure. The possibilities are—we mentioned leg-
islation. I think it is clearly true that it is not legislation.
The second thing might be an increased investment in plant and
equipment. Because of the way that the depreciation allowances
work, tax depreciations are faster than book depreciation. That
could be a reason. I just saw in the Treasury testimony that indi-
cates that it might not be the reason. I think that deserves further
study.
The other possible reason might be an increase you have in non-
corporate entities like S corporations. I don’t think that is big
enough to explain the entire shortfall but it might be there.
Another reason might be an increased use in exercised stock op-
tions by executives of corporations because they deduct it for tax
purposes but not for book purposes, and the other reason might be
some sort of statistical fluke that is in the data. These are very
complex data. But the other—the reason why I am here today is
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00131 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
128
1Tax Analysts is a non-partisan, non-profit organization located in Arlington, Virginia. It can
be accessed on the world wide web at www.tax.org. This testimony reflects the views of the au-
thor and should not in any way be attributed to Tax Analysts. Much of the information con-
tained in this testimony is from ‘‘Shelter Fallout? Corporate Taxes Down, Profits Up,’’ Tax
Notes, August 2, 1999 and ‘‘Despite September Surge, Corporate Tax Receipts Fall Short,’’ Tax
Notes, October 25, 1999.
that the other possible reason, it might be corporate tax shelters.
It might not be.
The point is I think there clearly is a downward trend here. The
trend could be as large as 10 or $20 billion a year annually.
But I think, just to conclude, that it would be foolish to take this
data as gospel. On the other hand, it would be foolish to ignore this
data at this time.
Thank you very much. I would be glad to answer any questions.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you, Dr. Sullivan.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of Martin A. Sullivan, Ph.D., Economist, Tax Analysts 1
1. THE RECENT DECLINE IN CORPORATE INCOME TAX RECEIPTS
For the fiscal year 1999 that ended on September 30th, the Treasury Department
collected $184 billion in receipts from the corporation income tax. This is down 2.5
percent from the prior year.
Prior to 1999, there have been two periods over the last two decades when cor-
porate income tax receipts declined. First, there was a huge drop in corporate tax
receipts in the early 1980s. This was due to the combination of two factors: (1) the
massive amount of corporate tax relief provided by the Economic Recovery Tax Act
of 1981 and (2) the 1981–82 recession, the deepest business cycle downturn since
the 1930s.
The second period of decline was in 1990 when corporation income tax receipts
declined by 9.9 percent. This decline coincided with a small recession that began in
July of 1990 and ended in March of 1991.
Chart 1 shows the annual rate of growth in corporation income tax receipts from
1979 though 1999.
What is striking about the 1999 decline in corporate tax receipts is that it does
not come in the midst of a recession or after legislation including any significant
corporate tax relief. The U.S. economy is booming. And, if anything, on net over the
last five years Congress has legislated more income tax increases than decreases for
U.S. corporations.
Chart 2 compares the growth rate of real GDP with the growth in corporate re-
ceipts. Except for the late 1990s, percentage changes in corporation income tax re-
ceipts have generally moved with changes in overall economic growth (as measured
by changes in real GDP) over the last two decades. Since 1995, the growth rate in
corporation income tax receipts has declined despite strong economic growth.
2. DO DECLINING CORPORATE PROFITS EXPLAIN DECLINING CORPORATE RECEIPTS?
If a recession or legislation cannot explain the recent decline in corporate tax re-
ceipts, the next most likely explanation would be a decline in the amount of profits.
There is no perfect measure of true economic profits. The most widely-cited profit
figure is that estimated by national income accountants of the Bureau of Economic
Analysis of the Commerce Department. This data (adjusted slightly to align cal-
endar year data with fiscal year data and to provide consistency over time) does
show that there recently has been a decline in the rate of growth corporate profits
in the late 1990s. But the decline in corporate receipts has been significantly larger
than the decline in profits as measured by the Commerce Department.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00132 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
129
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00133 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
130
One way to explore whether declining receipts are attributable to lower profits is
to construct a ratio of corporate receipts to profits and observe the movement of this
ratio over time. (Sometimes the ratio of corporation income tax receipts to profits
is thought of as an ‘‘effective tax rate.’’)
Chart 3 shows the ratio of corporation income tax receipts to corporate profits as
measured by the Commerce Department from 1978 through 1999. (Please see the
appendix at the end of this testimony for explanation and sources of the estimates.)
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00134 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
131
Corporation tax receipts were in excess of 30 percent of book profits in the late
1970s. As a result of corporate tax cuts included in the Economic Recovery and Tax
Act of 1981, corporate income tax receipts declined dramatically to 18.3 percent of
profits in 1983—the lowest ratio in the two decades from 1978 to 1999. Following
the 1982 Tax and Fiscal Responsibility Act taking effect in 1983, corporate tax re-
ceipts as a percentage of profits rose to the low twenties through 1985. The 1986
Tax Reform Act got the ratio up to the middle twenties. The ratio peaked at 26.6
percent in both 1993 and 1994.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00135 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
132
Despite the increase in the top corporation income tax rate from 34 to 35 percent
after passage of the 1993 Act, the ratio has steadily declined until it reached its
twelve-year low in 1999. The ratio of corporation income tax receipts to corporation
book profits now stands at 21.8 percent. The average ratio for the prior three years
prior to 1999 was 23.3 percent. The average ratio for the five years prior to 1999
was 24.3 percent. The average ratio for the ten years prior to 1999 was 24.7 percent.
So, depending on one’s perspective, the tax-to-profit ratio is ‘‘too low’’ by 1.4 percent,
2.4 percent, or 2.8 percent. (See Table B of Appendix for details.)
How significant are these reductions in the ratio? According to the Commerce De-
partment, corporate profits are now about $850 billion annually. Therefore, each
percentage point decline in the ratio of corporate tax represents a loss of about $8.5
billion to the Treasury. Depending on what one considers to be a ‘‘normal’’ ratio of
taxes to profits, the ‘‘shortfall’’ in corporation income tax receipts in 1999 is in a
neighborhood between $12 and $24 billion.
Using an average of prior-year ratios is only one standard for comparing current
levels of corporate taxation. It is arbitrary. Nobody can say with authority what
level corporate profits should be. But whatever measure is used, it is clear that
there is a decline in corporate profitability in the last few years that probably
amounts to more than $10 billion annually.
3. POSSIBLE REASONS FOR DECLINING EFFECTIVE TAX RATES
Observing is one thing. Explaining is another. What has caused this decline in
the taxation in corporate profits over the last five years? Here is a list of possible
explanations.
(1) Legislation. Congress has passed a lot of tax laws in the last ten years. But
there has been relatively little in the way of corporate income tax reductions. In
1997, there was a significant reduction in the corporate alternative minimum tax,
but the estimated revenue impact of this change was only about $1.5 billion for
1999. Offsetting this has been a fair number of small provisions raising corporate
taxes. (Extensions of expiring provisions are significant but because they are merely
extensions they would not explain declines in corporate revenue.) Perhaps the larg-
est recent corporate tax change was the increase in the top corporate tax rate from
34 to 35 percent enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993.
This provision increased corporate tax revenue by approximately $5 billion annu-
ally. In conclusion, if anything, the likely impact of recent tax legislation has been
to increase the ratio of corporate taxes to corporate profits.
(2) Increased investment in plant and equipment. As a result of the 1986 Act, tax
depreciation is not nearly as accelerated as it had been before 1986. Still, deprecia-
tion allowances are generally more accelerated for tax purposes than for book pur-
poses. Therefore, a rapid increase in investment could cause tax depreciation to rise
relative to book depreciation and therefore tax profits to decline relative to book
profits. During the five year period from 1994 though 1999, nonresidential fixed in-
vestment in the United States increased at an average annual inflation-adjusted
rate of 9.9 percent. During the prior five-year period (from 1989 through 1993) the
corresponding figure was only 1.5 percent. Without the availability of a depreciation
simulation model, like those that are used by the Treasury Department and Joint
Tax Committee economists, it is difficult to gauge whether increased investment can
explain the recent decline in corporate income taxes.
(3) Increased use of noncorporate entities. Changes in federal and state laws have
made use of Subchapter S corporations, limited partnerships, and limited liability
companies increasingly popular by small and mid-size businesses. Because these al-
ternative forms are generally not an option for the largest U.S. corporations (from
whom the vast bulk of corporation income tax is collected), there is no reason to ex-
pect this type of self-help to soon wipe out the corporation income tax. But increased
use of pass-through entities might explain some significant portion of the declines
in corporation tax in recent years.
(4) Increase in exercised stock options. An increasingly popular method of compen-
sating executives is the use of stock options. There are tax and accounting advan-
tages of using stock options as compensation. Since 1993, executive salaries in ex-
cess of $1 million are no longer deductible. But stock options can be deductible if
they are linked to a firm’s financial performance. On the accounting side, stock op-
tions are not considered a cost under traditional accounting rules. Stock options are
recognized as income (by the executive) and deductible (by the firm) when the stock
options are exercised. Therefore, any increase in executives’ exercising stock options
could reduce corporation income tax receipts without any corresponding decline in
book profits.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00136 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
133
(5) Possible statistical fluke. Perhaps some statistical bias—one way or the other—
has seeped into the receipts data tabulated by the Treasury or into the profit data
tabulated by the Commerce Department. (The calculation of profits is a complex un-
dertaking explained in a lengthy 1985 Commerce Department Report called ‘‘Cor-
porate Profits: Profits Before Tax, Profits Tax Liability, and Dividends’’ available at
www.bea.doc.gov/bea/ARTICLES/NATIONAL/NIPA/Methpap/methpap2.pdf.
Given the large amount of structural change recently in the U.S. economy, and
given the difficulty that statisticians have in tracking these changes, this possibility
deserves serious consideration as possible explanation of the apparent decline in the
tax-to-profit ratio.
(6) Other factors. The drop in corporate tax receipts may be due to some other
factors not identified here.
4. DECLINING TAX RECEIPTS AND CORPORATE TAX SHELTERS
Among the other possible explanations of the recent decline corporate receipts is
the increased use of a variety of aggressive tax planning techniques commonly re-
ferred to as ‘‘corporate tax shelters.’’ The charts presented in this testimony show
a slowdown in the rate of growth of corporate receipts in the mid–1990s. This rough-
ly coincides with the anecdotal evidence about the timing of the increased use of
shelters.
In addition, many knowledgeable commentators suspect that tax shelter may be
eating into the corporate tax base:
• In its recently released interest and penalty study (JCS–3–99, July 22, 1999),
the Joint Committee on Taxation made the following comment on the amount of cor-
porate tax shelter activity: ‘‘Although economic information concerning the cost of
tax shelters is largely anecdotal, some believe that the resulting revenue loss may
be in excess of $10 billion a year.’’
• In testimony before the Senate Finance Committee, the New York State Bar As-
sociation Tax Section stated: ‘‘We believe that there are serious, and growing, prob-
lems with aggressive, sophisticated and, we believe in some cases, artificial trans-
actions designed principally to achieve a particular tax advantage. . . . There is ob-
viously an effect on revenue. While we are unable to estimate the amount of this
revenue loss, anecdotal evidence and personal experience lead us to believe that it
is likely to be quite significant.’’ (‘‘Statement of Harold R. Handler on Behalf of the
Tax Section, New York State Bar Association, before the Senate Finance Com-
mittee,’’ April 27,1999.)
• In its recent white paper on corporate tax shelters (July 1, 1999), the Treasury
Department wondered aloud about the relationship between declines in this ratio
and tax shelters: ‘‘While corporate tax payments have been rising, taxes have not
grown as fast as have corporate profits. One hallmark of corporate tax shelters is
a reduction in taxable income with no concomitant reduction in book income. The
ratio of book income to taxable income has risen fairly sharply in the last few years.
Some of this decline may be due to tax shelter activity.’’
But it is important to remember that a decline in the ratio of tax receipts to prof-
its provides no proof about a relationship between corporate tax shelters and aggre-
gate corporate tax receipts. Such data are only suggestive. The bigger the shortfall,
the more suggestive they are.
The situation in many ways is analogous to the use of low profitability of foreign
controlled U.S. corporations as evidence of transfer pricing abuses by foreign-
headquartered companies operating in the United States. As in the case of the con-
troversy about inbound transfer pricing, finding alternative explanations of low
taxes—such as high rates of investment—lessens suspicion that corporate shelter
activity causes of lower corporate taxes. On the other hand, if this pattern persists
and no alternative explanations are borne out, the likelihood that tax shelters are
the cause of declining corporate tax receipts will increase.
By its nature, the aggregate data can never provide conclusive evidence about the
relationship between corporation income tax receipts and corporate tax shelters. In
the end, Congress and the Administration must base any decisions it makes about
tax shelters on uncertain information. Any decision based on solely on information
presented here would be foolish. However, any decision ignoring this information
similarly would be ill-advised.
APPENDIX: EXPLANATION OF THE DATA
Historical data on corporate tax receipts are from the Office and Management and
Budget, ‘‘Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1999, Historical Ta-
bles,’’ Table 2.1, ‘‘Receipts by Source: 1934–2003’’ available at www.access.gpo.gov/
su—docs/budget99/pdf/hist.pdf. The most recent data on corporate tax receipts are
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00137 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
134
from the U.S. Department of the Treasury, Financial Management Service, ‘‘Month-
ly Treasury Statement,’’ October 1999, available at www.fms.treas.gov/mts/
mts0999.txt. These data are shown in Column (2) of Table A below.
Annual corporate profit data used for calculations in this report are from the
Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) Quarterly historical
data are from the BEA’s web site at www.bea.doc.gov/bea/dn/0898nip3/table4.htm.
The most recent data are available at www.bea.doc.gov/bea/dn/profits.htm. Data on
real GDP growth are also from these same sources.
Ideally, in order to match BEA quarterly data with fiscal-year data from the
Treasury, profit data from four consecutive quarters ending with the third quarter
of any year would be averaged to arrive at an annual figure for that year. For exam-
ple, the average of BEA profit data from the last quarter of 1997 and the first three
quarters of 1998 is paired with receipts data for fiscal year 1998. The entire series
is shown in Column (3) of Table A below.
However, the latest profit data available from BEA are for second quarter of 1999.
In order to derive an estimate for 1999 that is consistent with estimates for prior
years, average profit data from four consecutive quarters ending with the second
quarter was used an approximation of average profit data from four consecutive
quarters ending with the third quarter. For example, the average of BEA profit data
from the last two quarters of 1997 and the first two quarters of 1998 are paired
with the corresponding receipts data for fiscal year 1998. The entire series is shown
in Column (4) of Table A below.
The ratios cited throughout this testimony and in the chart use this profit data
and are shown in Column (6). In the interests of full disclosure, corresponding ratios
for the more ideal measure are shown in column (5). Using ratios in column (5) do
not appreciable change the results.
Table B shows the calculations used to estimate the shortfall in corporate profits
in 1999. All data in Table B are from, or are computed from, data shown in Table
A.
Table A.—Corporate Profit Data from the Commerce Department, Corporate Income Receipts
Data from the Treasury Department, and the Ratio of Receipts to Profits, 1978–1999
Year
Corporation
Income Tax
Receipts
Corporate
Profits (Year
Ending in 3rd
Qtr.)
Corporate
Profits (Year
Ending in 2nd
Qtr.)
Ratio of Cor-
porate Re-
ceipts to Prof-
its (End 3rd
Qtr.) [(2)/(3)]
Ratio of Cor-
porate Re-
ceipts to Prof-
its (End 2nd
Qtr.[(2)/(4)]
Rate of
Growth Real
Gross Domes-
tic Product
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
1978 ............................................. $60.0 $200.2 $195.9 29.9% 30.6% 5.4%
1979 ............................................. $65.7 $217.6 $218.1 30.2% 30.1% 2.8%
1980 ............................................. $64.6 $191.8 $200.6 33.7% 32.2% ¥0.3%
1981 ............................................. $61.1 $206.5 $195.9 29.6% 31.2% 2.3%
1982 ............................................. $49.2 $186.4 $194.8 26.4% 25.3% ¥2.1%
1983 ............................................. $37.0 $218.4 $201.8 17.0% 18.3% 4.0%
1984 ............................................. $56.9 $280.1 $270.8 20.3% 21.0% 7.0%
1985 ............................................. $61.3 $302.0 $294.8 20.3% 20.8% 3.6%
1986 ............................................. $63.1 $296.0 $306.4 21.3% 20.6% 3.1%
1987 ............................................. $83.9 $316.4 $297.6 26.5% 28.2% 3.5%
1988 ............................................. $94.5 $368.5 $359.2 25.7% 26.3% 4.2%
1989 ............................................. $103.3 $389.5 $390.9 26.5% 26.4% 3.5%
1990 ............................................. $93.5 $392.0 $393.3 23.9% 23.8% 1.7%
1991 ............................................. $98.1 $407.0 $400.0 24.1% 24.5% –0.2%
1992 ............................................. $100.3 $416.5 $424.3 24.1% 23.6% 3.4%
1993 ............................................. $117.5 $471.2 $442.0 24.9% 26.6% 2.4%
1994 ............................................. $140.4 $551.3 $527.0 25.5% 26.6% 4.0%
1995 ............................................. $157.1 $649.9 $622.8 24.2% 25.2% 2.7%
1996 ............................................. $171.8 $736.9 $722.7 23.3% 23.8% 3.7%
1997 ............................................. $182.3 $803.2 $781.8 22.7% 23.3% 4.5%
1998 ............................................. $188.7 $824.4 $827.9 22.9% 22.8% 4.3%
1999 ............................................. $184.7 N/A $844.2 N/A 21.9% 3.0%
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00138 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
135
Table B.—Calculations Used to Estimate the 1999 ‘‘Shortfall’’ in Corporate Tax Receipts under
Various Assumptions about ‘‘Normal’’ Receipts
3-Year Avg. 5-Year Avg. 10-Year Avg.
(1) Average of Prior Years ...................................................................................... 23.3% 24.3% 24.7%
(2) 1999 Ratio ........................................................................................................ 21.9% 21.9% 21.9%
(3) Difference .......................................................................................................... 1.4% 2.4% 2.8%
(4) 1999 BEA Corporate Profits .............................................................................. $844.2 $844.2 $844.2
(5) Estimate of ‘‘Shortfall’’ [(3) times (4)] ............................................................ $11.8 $20.3 $23.6
f
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Carpenter, you may proceed.
STATEMENT OF DANNY R. CARPENTER, VICE PRESIDENT-FI-
NANCE, KANSAS CITY SOUTHERN INDUSTRIES, INC., KANSAS
CITY, MO
Mr. CARPENTER. Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman, and
members of the Committee. My name is Danny R. Carpenter and
I am Vice President of Finance of Kansas City Southern Industries
located in Kansas City, Missouri. It is a pleasure to appear today,
and I appreciate the opportunity to be here.
I have been a tax professional for approximately 20 years. At this
time I have overall responsibility for tax functions at Kansas City
Southern, but not day-to-day responsibility.
Over the past several years, I have been approached at least four
to five times to consider transactions designed solely to avoid cor-
porate taxes. I have examined only one of those transactions in
depth, and the others only briefly. These transactions had three
common elements, as I saw it. First, they were very complex and
relied on technical application of tax rules to facts that were con-
trived to produce benefits never intended by Congress. Second, the
transactions involve very sizable fees for professional advisors, in-
vestment bankers and others. And third, the transactions had little
or no business purpose or economic substance.
My company, KCSI, did not participate in any of these trans-
actions because of the lack of business and economic reality, and
also because of concern that a transaction designed exclusively to
generate tax benefits would not and should not succeed.
I am not suggesting that my company does not wish to save
taxes where possible. We strive to pay no more taxes than the law
requires. But we do not believe it is appropriate to engage in a sig-
nificant transaction unrelated to a company’s business, solely or
principally to create tax benefits. Such transactions are incon-
sistent with a self-assessing tax system and should be viewed as
abusive and eliminated.
My concern about these transactions also extends to the way
they have been developed and promoted. They are not presented,
in my experience, as business transactions with nontax economic
advantages; rather, they are promoted as transactions to provide
tax benefits and for which an attempt would be made to establish
a business purpose.
In several instances the names of prominent local or national
companies that had undertaken similar transactions were men-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00139 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
136
tioned. Presumably that was to add credibility, but it also had the
effect of creating competitive pressure, especially for companies in
similar businesses. Tax professionals and accounting and law firms
apparently have participated in designing these transactions and
certainly in promoting and executing them. Without dwelling on
these points, I would just say that especially in a self-assessing tax
system, we would like to think that tax professionals would help
police these kinds of transactions, not design and promote them.
Finally, I would like to express my concern about possible solu-
tions. Because of difficulties in finding a remedy for each individual
transaction, there may be a tendency towards broad solutions for
all such transactions. But broad standards mean that imple-
menting regulations take years to complete and possible years of
litigation will be required to develop meaningful rules. Broad solu-
tions also establish traps for the unwary, produce unanticipated
consequences, and create enormous costs and burdens for our tax
administration system. Accordingly, broad, general solutions and
vague standards must be avoided.
While I do not believe the transactions I have seen would survive
an IRS challenge under existing law, I recognize that under our
current system, the IRS could easily be overwhelmed if there is
widespread adoption of abusive techniques, as seems to be occur-
ring. Accordingly, I believe congressional action is needed, at least
to aid in the detection of these transactions through additional dis-
closure requirements, and probably also to strengthen existing
anti-abuse rules.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to appear and offer
comments on a very important issue.
[The prepared statement follows:]
Statement of Danny R. Carpenter, Vice President-Finance, Kansas City
Southern Industries, Inc., Kansas City, Missouri
Good afternoon Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rangel, and members of the Committee. It is
my pleasure to appear today in conjunction with the Committee’s examination of so-
called corporate tax shelters. I am Vice President-Finance for Kansas City Southern
Industries, Inc. (‘‘KCSI’’).
I have been a tax professional for approximately 20 years, first as an attorney in
private practice, and since 1993, with Kansas City Southern Industries, Inc. Until
May 1995, I served as Vice President-Tax and Tax Counsel for KCSI, and I continue
to have overall (not day-to-day) responsibility for tax functions at KCSI.
Over the past several years, I have been approached on four or five occasions to
consider transactions that were designed simply to avoid corporate taxes. On one
occasion I examined the proposed transaction relatively thoroughly, and on the
other occasions, only briefly. In each instance, I found several matters of concern:
1. The transactions were very complex and relied on the technical applica-
tion of normal tax law provisions to facts that were contrived to produce
tax results never contemplated by Congress.
2. The transactions involved very sizeable fees for professional advisors, in-
vestment bankers and others who promoted the transactions.
3. The transactions had either no business or economic purpose or a busi-
ness or economic purpose that was dubious.
KCSI did not participate in any of the transactions presented to us, because of
the lack of business and economic reality to the proposed transactions and our con-
cern that a transaction constructed exclusively, or virtually exclusively, to generate
tax benefits would not achieve such benefits.
Please do not interpret this statement as an indication that our company is not
interested in controlling its tax cost or otherwise saving taxes where appropriate.
In conducting our business and engaging in transactions undertaken for appropriate
business purposes, we, of course, strive to pay no more taxes than the law requires
and employ outside tax professionals to assist in achieving that goal. However, we
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00140 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
137
do not believe it is appropriate to engage in a significant transaction which is unre-
lated to a company’s business principally or solely for the purpose of generating tax
benefits. Such transactions are inconsistent with a self-assessing tax system and
should be viewed as abusive and eliminated.
My concern about these transactions extends also to the way in which they have
been developed and promoted. The transactions brought to my attention were not
presented as business transactions with non-tax economic advantages. To the con-
trary, they were each promoted as a transaction that could reduce corporate taxes
and for which an attempt would be made to find a business purpose. In several in-
stances, the names of prominent local or national companies that had undertaken
similar transactions were mentioned, presumably to add credibility to the proposal,
but also creating pressure because of the increase in earnings a company could
achieve through tax savings.
Tax professionals at accounting firms and law firms apparently have participated
in designing these transactions and in promoting and executing them. On several
occasions, the transactions presented to me were put forth as ‘‘proprietary,’’ and
prior to disclosure of the ‘‘proprietary’’ information, I was asked to agree not to un-
dertake the transaction with other advisors. This approach raises other issues not
now relevant (e.g., an attorney’s obligation to use his or her expertise to assist each
client who could potentially benefit from the ‘‘proprietary’’ information), but the
point here is that tax professionals should assist in policing abusive transactions,
not designing and promoting them to generate substantial fees.
Despite my belief that so-called corporate tax shelters are abusive and should be
eliminated, I would like to express one significant concern regarding possible solu-
tions to these transactions. Because of the nature of our current tax laws, these
transactions present very complex issues cutting across many aspects of the Internal
Revenue Code, and solutions aimed at specific transactions may be seen as only
plugging one hole in the dike, while others continue to pop open. On the other hand,
solutions that use very broad standards often require years for the development of
regulations and possibly decades of litigation before meaningful rules are developed.
Such broad solutions often establish traps for the unwary, result in unanticipated
consequences and create enormous costs and burdens for our system of tax adminis-
tration. Accordingly, broad, general solutions with vague language must be avoided.
As I have indicated, we do not think the transactions presented to us would survive
an IRS challenge under existing law, but I recognize that in a self-assessment tax
system the IRS could easily be overwhelmed if there is widespread adoption of these
abusive techniques, as seems to be occurring. Thus I think Congressional action is
needed, at least to aide the Internal Revenue Service in detecting the use of such
transactions, and probably also to clarify the anti-abuse rules now in the Code and
those employed by the courts.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to appear before this Committee and
offer comments on a very complex and important tax issue.
Chairman ARCHER. My gratitude to all of you gentlemen. Mr.
Kies, your testimony seems to be different from Dr. Sullivan’s, and
I wonder if you could address the apparent differences between Dr.
Sullivan’s presentation relative to corporate tax receipts. Maybe I
missed something, but I think there is some disparity between your
two testimonies.
Mr. KIES. Mr. Chairman, there is—and, unfortunately, Marty
and I haven’t had a chance to actually explore this, but we have
identified two very serious flaws in his analysis that I think indi-
cate that the conclusion that he reached is factually incorrect.
In defining the corporate effective tax rate, he used corporate tax
receipts and not the liability of corporations being reported year to
year. Receipts and liability are two very different things. For a par-
ticular year, a corporation’s liability could be a hundred million but
there may be a variety of adjustments that occur that change the
net tax receipts to the Federal Government because of receiving re-
funds from prior years or paying deficiencies from other years.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00141 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
138
The other problem that we have identified with Marty’s analysis
is that his denominator includes a number of pieces of income that
are not subject to the corporate income tax, including sub S cor-
poration income, which he did identify, profits from Federal Re-
serve Banks, and also the failure to eliminate State or local income
tax expense. These are all items that the Bureau of Economic Anal-
ysis backs out in calculating what are corporate profits.
We redid his numbers with these two adjustments, and what it
shows is that, for 1999, the effective corporate tax rate is 32.7 per-
cent. The average for ’89 to ’98 is 32.5 percent. Therefore, it would
suggest that the effective rate expected for 1999 is well in line with
the rate that we have seen over the past 10 years. The rate for ’94
to ’98 was 32.5 as well.
So our analysis with the modifications and the way we think the
data should be analyzed suggest that the effective rate for this year
is very consistent with what we have seen over the past 10 years.
We plan to provide the Committee with this detailed information.
It wasn’t possible to get it done in time for today because of how
recently his article was published.
Chairman ARCHER. We will keep the record open for the receipt
of that information.
[The information follows:]
November 30, 1999
The Honorable Bill Archer
United States House of Representatives
1236 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515
Dear Mr. Chairman:
I am writing to respond to a question you posed to me at the November 10, 1999,
Ways and Means Committee hearing on ‘‘corporate tax shelters.’’
At the hearing, I stated that a claim made by Marty Sullivan of Tax Analysts re-
garding corporate effective tax rates was based on a seriously flawed methodology.
Specifically, Mr. Sullivan testified that the corporate effective tax rate in FY 1999
is ‘‘too low by 1.5 percent, 2.5 percent, or 2.9 percent’’ compared to the prior three-
, five-, and ten-year periods, respectively. You asked me to provide the Committee
with information that supports my critique of Mr. Sullivan’s claim.
Mr. Sullivan’s measure of corporate effective tax rates is flawed for two main rea-
sons. First, the ‘‘numerator’’ in his calculation is corporate tax receipts rather than
corporate tax liability. The amount of corporate tax payments that Treasury receives
during the year only partially relates to current-year tax liability. Many of the pay-
ments and refunds during the current year reflect adjustments to prior-year tax li-
ability (e.g., audit adjustments, carrybacks of NOLs, etc.). Also, companies’ tax pay-
ments for current-year liability are based on estimates, with final tax settlement
typically occurring six to nine months after the close of the tax year. The proper
measure should be corporate tax liability, data that is available from the IRS.
Second, the ‘‘denominator’’ in Mr. Sullivan’s calculation is unadjusted corporate
profits before tax, taken from the Commerce Department’s GDP accounts. This is
an inappropriate measure of corporate profits for purposes of calculating corporate
effective tax rates. For purposes of calculating corporate profits, CBO makes four
adjustments that Sullivan neglected:
(1) CBO subtracts profits of the Federal Reserve Banks;
(2) CBO subtracts profits of subchapter S corporations;
(3) CBO subtracts State and local income tax payments; and
(4) CBO adds corporate capital gains.
PricewaterhouseCoopers has calculated corporate effective tax rates using the
proper methodology. First, the ‘‘numerator’’ we use is corporate tax liability as re-
ported by the IRS or, for more recent years, estimated by the Commerce Depart-
ment’s Bureau of Economic Analysis. Second, the ‘‘denominator’’ (e.g., corporate
profits), follows CBO’s methodology, with the subtractions and additions discussed
above. Making these corrections to Mr. Sullivan’s work, we found that the corporate
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00142 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
139
effective tax rate in 1999 actually exceeds the average for the prior three, five, and
ten years by between 0.2 percent and 0.3 percent.
CORPORATE EFFECTIVE TAX RATES
Year Sullivan(fiscal years) percent
PwC
(calendar years) percent
1999 ............................................. 21.8 32.7 a
1996–1998 ................................... 23.3 32.4
1994–1998 ................................... 24.3 32.4
1989–1998 ................................... 24.7 32.5
aBased on first six months, seasonally adjusted.
In other words, there is no evidence that corporate effective tax rates are declin-
ing. Rather, the reverse appears to be true.
The Committee also should note that there is new evidence to support the view
that the slight drop (2 percent) in net corporate income tax receipts in FY 1999 may
simply be a statistical aberration, as Mr. Sullivan has acknowledged. Specifically,
corporate income tax receipts in the first month of FY 2000 (October 1999) were
nearly 25 percent higher than the first month of FY 1999 (October 1998). As I dis-
cussed at the hearing, we will continue to monitor the incoming data to weigh
whether there is any real evidence to suggest that the corporate income tax base
is in danger of eroding.
Sincerely,
KENNETH J. KIES
f
Chairman ARCHER. Dr. Sullivan, you want to make any com-
ment?
Mr. SULLIVAN. Sure. I appreciate it.
I freely admit that these calculations are preliminary, that there
are a lot of difficulties with them. That would only apply to my
table number 3.
Tables number 1 and 2—I will talk about table 3. But tables
number 1 and 2 are still unaffected by Ken’s criticism.
Now let’s go to table number 3. There is a—there are just a lot
of—what I did, just so you know where I was coming from, I just
chose the most commonly used profit figure. I did not fish or look
around their search for the one that would produce the sexy result.
I think that this does deserve a lot of study. I think some of the
shortcomings that Ken mentioned could go either way. That is,
when you make all the corrections that you would like to see,
maybe it would show more dramatic change or I think some of the
shortfalls are not biased.
But the other factor is—and, again, is that even if it is level, that
we would expect, with legislation, that it should increase. So, you
know, it is always hard to know what the right answer is. But I
just go back to the common sense of the first chart where corporate
receipts are down, and we are not in a recession, and that is very
unusual. And that is—otherwise, I agree with everything Ken said.
Mr. KIES. Just by way of clarification, we didn’t fish around or
otherwise for this data. We used what CBO uses as its methodology
for computing the effective corporate tax rate, and we used what
the Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis uses for
its measure of liability. So, I mean, we used what we thought were
fairly conventional numbers for purposes of making this analysis.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00143 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
140
I would also point out that OMB predicted that corporate tax re-
ceipts would be down this year earlier this year because of the
even-handed appreciation that is occurring because of significant
investment increases that occurred in the past couple of years. This
was a development that was predicted by the experts at both CBO
and OMB, and they specifically noted that there was a dramatic in-
crease in investment in the middle ’90s over what had occurred
earlier during the recession of the early ’80s. And those deprecia-
tion deductions are now finding their way into the corporate
revenve data.
Chairman ARCHER. Dr. Sullivan.
Mr. SULLIVAN. I just want to mention I don’t know if I am dis-
agreeing with you or not, Ken, but my understanding is that CBO
predicted a downturn in corporate receipts due to their belief that
corporate profits would decline, which has not been the case this
year. So, in effect, they were at least partially right for the wrong
reasons.
So, I do agree—I do agree with Ken. That is absolutely true that
the increase in investment, as I mentioned in my article and in my
testimony, may account for this. And I believe the Treasury in
their testimony, they have much bigger economic models than I
have, addressed that issue, and they didn’t believe it was a prob-
lem.
Chairman ARCHER. When can we expect to get the final figures
on 1999? These are just estimates right now.
Mr. SULLIVAN. It is a source of frustration to us. It is—it may
take 3 years to get final figures on 1999. The numbers come cas-
cading in, and they are continuously revised. So we each month get
new data, and we make new estimates based on that.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you very much.
Mr. Hariton, you mentioned perhaps an exception could be
carved out for, I believe in your words, the little guy relative to
whatever we do on tax shelters and that that would take care of
the compliance costs. I must tell you, I am very concerned about
the compliance costs of the entire code, irrespective of the size of
the taxpayer. When we talk about spending as much on compliance
as we spend on national defense each year, that should be a matter
of concern for all of us. And so the compliance—any additional com-
pliance costs that go beyond being able to really address the prob-
lem in this area would concern me.
You commented that the Treasury really just needs and the IRS
just need more resources, and I agree with you on that. Our Com-
mittee does not set those resources, I am sorry to say, or they
would have more. But the administration testimony today was that
they can’t administer this even with more resources when they
don’t know what is going on. I think that is pretty much what they
said. So, if we gave them more resources and they come back and
say doesn’t matter, we don’t know what is going on, we can’t use
them, what would your response do that be?
Mr. HARITON. Well, I guess one response I would make is we all
know that Treasury is saying this in part, and it is only natural
that they should say it, because the Treasury is requesting legisla-
tion. But the truth is Treasury is doing a marvelous job with the
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00144 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
141
resources it has—excuse me, the IRS is doing a marvelous job. It
has a string of victories in court.
I can tell you as a lawyer that those victories are very valuable
in advising a client the reason Mr. Carpenter’s company is not in-
vesting in these Tax shelters not because it is an unusually moral
company but rather because the company is properly advised, and
the proper advice is these transactions do not work. And I can tell
you that most companies take that very, very seriously.
You hear stories about how the CEO goes golfing with somebody
that Representative Doggett might describe as a shyster, and the
shyster tells her that there is some terrific deal where she can
avoid all of her company’s taxes. And of course that is incorrect as
a matter of law. But none of us can stop that CEO from calling up
the law firm of Winken, Blinken and Nod, if that is whom she
wants to take her advice from. But the truth is that with decisions
like this, it will become more and more clear even to that CEO that
these transactions don’t work as a matter of law. But what is clear
is that if the IRS doesn’t litigate these cases, and litigate them in
force, and litigate them successfully, in effect as a practical matter
the law has changed, the advice has changed, and then that CEO
will do them more.
So I don’t see any alternative for the Commissioner and any al-
ternative for the Treasury Department but to litigate these cases
as best they can. And if they succeed, new laws will be unneces-
sary. But if they fail, if they are not going to do it, I don’t think
any law that we put on the books is going to make one whit of dif-
ference.
I mean, think about it practically. We publish a definition of bad
transactions and bad whisperings and it has 19 clauses and 3 sub-
parts and 32 exceptions. Is anybody going to be walking around the
golf course with that, with the CEO trying to tell her that the
transaction in question does or does not fit that definition? No. En-
forcement really is the answer of how to make sure people are real-
ly paying their taxes properly.
Chairman ARCHER. Are you saying then we have not yet realized
the full impact of the remedial action that is already under way?
Mr. HARITON. As a practicing lawyer I can tell you that those
court decisions have made a difference in the way people are be-
having in the real world and that they will continue to make a dif-
ference in the way people are behaving in the real world. As I have
said in my statement, I don’t think that one should stop there. I
think that Treasury and the IRS should have the maximum of re-
sources because the task is two-fold and the hardest task is the
first one, finding the transactions and distinguishing them with
judgment and insight from legitimate business transactions. That
is something that can only be done as a matter of administration
and then telling these taxpayers those transactions don’t work.
The second task is, for the few taxpayers who disagree, taking
them to court, proving that you mean it, proving that the trans-
actions don’t work. If that happens on a consistent basis, the sys-
tem will work, and you will find that people will not enter into
these transactions.
Chairman ARCHER. Let me ask one last question which is a hypo-
thetical, and first let me ask all of you, have you read H.R. 2255?
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00145 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
142
Does each of you have an understanding of what the bill does? Doc
Sullivan says no, but that is not really what his job is here today.
I understand that. What about you, Mr. Carpenter?
Mr. CARPENTER. I have only looked at a summary.
Chairman ARCHER. Mr. Hariton, you have looked at it, I take it;
and, Mr. Kies, you have looked at it. I will ask the two of you this
hypothetical question.
Let’s assume this. That an individual has had a family corpora-
tion for a number of years and finally realized one day that their
earnings are being double taxed; and they decide, hey, this doesn’t
make any sense. I don’t know why I continue to have this family
corporation. I am now going to have a partnership. And the cor-
poration is dissolved so that the partnership earnings can flow out
singly taxed to the owners rather than doubly taxed. Would I in
any way be covered by this bill by taking that action?
Mr. KIES. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think you would be covered by
the general terms of Mr. Doggett’s bill which would indicate that
any deduction exclusion that doesn’t change the economic condition
of the taxpayer could be disallowed. I would expect that Mr.
Doggett and or the Treasury or IRS would take the position that
that is something that ought to be covered by a specific exception,
that is a result that is clearly anticipated by the law.
I think your question highlights a more fundamental point and
that is that transactions as basic as the one you have described
would have to be run through that continuous filter of are you or
are you not a transaction that is contemplated by the law. And that
is the biggest source of concern to us, that is like asking the IRS
to completely rewrite the Internal Revenue Code through the prism
of what is clearly contemplated rather than allowing taxpayers to
rely on a body of law that has been built up over 75 years. And
that really is the source of greatest concern about the nature of Mr.
Doggett’s proposal.
Chairman ARCHER. But the decision that was made in the hypo-
thetical that I gave to you was solely for tax reasons. There was
no change in the business transactions. It was driven solely for tax
reasons and no other reason.
Would there have been a disclosure report required?
Mr. KIES. Again, I think it would depend upon how comfortable
you were with either the statutory exceptions ultimately included
in enactment of the provision.
Chairman ARCHER. But is that statutory exception included in
this bill?
Mr. KIES. I think that is probably a matter of interpretation. But
there is, I think, generally an exception that is intended to say if
it is a result clearly contemplated by the Code—certainly, for exam-
ple, the Treasury Department proposal has that exception—that
you would be okay.
Again, it just highlights a more fundamental——
Chairman ARCHER. But under the terms of this bill, if you were
advising me under this situation, would you advise me to file any
kind of a disclosure?
Mr. KIES. You know, one would at least have to think about that.
And if this were ever to be enacted into law, these question would
be asked thousands of times over. What would become the stand-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00146 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
143
ard of practice is very difficult to predict as we sit here with some-
thing that is pretty hypothetical, at least at this point.
Chairman ARCHER. Yeah, but this seems to me to fall exactly
within the definition. There is no economic gain. This is strictly
driven by taxes. And does that make it wrong?
Mr. KIES. Well, I don’t think—as a matter of wrong or right,
hopefully, one would not approach it that way. It would be a ques-
tion if the statute clearly permits you to use your business form.
And one would, therefore, presume that if you wanted to switch
from being a C corp to a partnership or a sub S entity you should
be permitted to do that. But, technically, it fits squarely within the
general definition of what would be a targeted transaction.
Chairman ARCHER. Thank you very much.
And, Mr. Doggett, I am sure you would like to inquire.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am still seeking co-
sponsors, but you are not at the top of my list right now.
As far as your example, my answer would be that this legislation
doesn’t cover reorganizations and that the transaction you describe
does not involve a loss, credit or deduction, so we don’t even get
to the enumerated provisions.
But I have a few questions for Mr. Kies.
Welcome back. When you were here on March the 10th, in re-
sponse to questions that I asked, you indicated that you were op-
posed to Congress taking any legislative action on tax shelters
whatsoever. Is that still your position?
Mr. KIES. Yes, Mr. Doggett. And I think intervening events just
firm up that position because of the Tax Court cases that have
shown——
Mr. DOGGETT. I appreciate that and would be glad for you to fol-
low up in elaboration as to why. But since my time is limited,
haven’t you voiced the opinion yourself that Congress would, in
fact, take no legislative action on tax shelters in this Congress?
Mr. KIES. I think what I have said is I didn’t expect Congress
would act this year on this issue.
Mr. DOGGETT. Are you familiar with the operations of your firm
Pricewaterhouse with reference to the promotion of what some
folks call tax shelter products?
Mr. KIES. I am familiar with the operations of our firm.
Mr. DOGGETT. What do these tax shelter products cost?
Mr. KIES. There is no specific cost.
Mr. DOGGETT. Just give me an idea of the range. The kind of tax
shelter products that you would market, say, to a Fortune 500 com-
pany, what is the range of the cost of an individual tax product?
Mr. KIES. Mr. Doggett, perhaps you misunderstood my earlier
answer. I said I am familiar with the type of advice we provide. I
didn’t say anything about marketing tax shelters. So if you want
to rephrase your question I would be happy to answer.
Mr. DOGGETT. Are there any tax products that you sell to cor-
porations in this country, large corporations, in order to permit
them to reduce significantly the amount of their taxes? And, if so,
can you tell me what those kind of products cost?
Mr. KIES. The costs would be totally dependent on the com-
plexity.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00147 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
144
The answer to your first question is, we advise clients with re-
spect to ways in which to legitimately reduce their tax liability
with some things as simple as their capital structure in using debt
instead of equity, which gives rise to interest deductions, and then
there are much more complicated transactions involving corporate
reorganizations. The level—the fees involved would be directly re-
lated to the complexity.
Mr. DOGGETT. Mr. Kies, do you know Mr. Fernando Murias, the
co-chair, as of 1998, of the firm’s Mid-Atlantic and Washington na-
tional tax practice?
Mr. KIES. Yes, sir, I do.
Mr. DOGGETT. Is he still employed after he gave that Forbes
interview?
Mr. KIES. Mr. Morias is still a partner with the firm. That is cor-
rect.
Mr. DOGGETT. Is he still the director of the Mid-Atlantic and
Washington National Tax Practice?
Mr. KIES. No, he is not.
Mr. DOGGETT. And when did that change?
Mr. KIES. He took a different position within the last 6 or 8
months.
Mr. DOGGETT. And, as you know because we talked about this
some when you were here in March, he told Forbes that your com-
pany has actively promoted about 30 mass market products, and
for each had prepared a marketing briefing book and assigned
product managers called ‘‘product champions’’ to coordinate sales,
and that you had 40 newly hired professional salesmen helping
pitch these ideas to companies that aren’t current clients. Was he
accurate in that regard?
Mr. KIES. Mr. Doggett, I think the words that Mr. Morias chose,
which were at a cocktail party, were rather inartful. The
reality——
Mr. DOGGETT. Were they inaccurate?
Mr. KIES. They were both inartful and inaccurate. What is a fact
is that the firm does identify planning strategies from time to time
that may have common application to more than one client and
under those circumstances it wouldn’t be surprising that we might
share those with potential clients.
Mr. DOGGETT. What is the range of the cost of those 30 mass
market products that he referred to?
Mr. KIES. I really don’t know.
Mr. DOGGETT. Would you be able to supply us that information?
Mr. KIES. It is possible.
Mr. DOGGETT. Will you make an effort to do so?
Mr. KIES. Certainly.
Mr. DOGGETT. It is a profit center for the company that I suppose
is growing and is substantial, isn’t it?
Mr. KIES. Not really, Mr. Doggett.
Mr. DOGGETT. Since we are on the caution light, let me ask you
about another comment that he made, that your firm markets so-
called ‘‘black box’’ products. I asked you about that in March and
you indicated you weren’t familiar with it. These, he is quoted as
saying, ‘‘are complex and unique strategies that we do not publicize
broadly.’’ Each can save a client from tens of millions to hundreds
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00148 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
145
of millions of dollars in tax. Has your company marketed such
products?
Mr. KIES. Mr. Doggett, again, I think the words Mr. Morias used
were both inartful—it is certainly true that we have planned trans-
actions for clients that may have substantial tax savings like doing
a tax-free re-organization instead of a sale of a subsidiary.
Mr. DOGGETT. Never heard of them referred to as ‘‘black box’’
proposals?
Mr. KIES. The term black box——
Mr. DOGGETT. Do you have some proposals, as he says, that you
don’t publicize broadly and you save for a few select clients?
Mr. KIES. Mr. Doggett, perhaps you could indicate which ques-
tion you would like me to answer.
Mr. DOGGETT. The latter one, the one I just asked. Would you
like me to restate it?
Mr. KIES. You asked me whether or not we use a black box. And
then, as I tried to give that answer, you interrupted me. Maybe you
just tell me which question you would like me to answer.
Mr. DOGGETT. I would glad to, if the chairman would permit.
Mr. MCCRERY. I would indulge the gentleman one last question.
Mr. DOGGETT. Thank you. It is because of the danger of filibuster
that I have tried to ask these questions succinctly.
Let me ask you, sir, if, as one last question only, if your company
is still promoting the bond and option sales strategy that you call
the Boss plan, a way to circumvent what this Committee did on
section 357 in June.
Mr. KIES. I am not even familiar with that transaction. I would
be happy to look at it and get back to you.
Mr. DOGGETT. I am sure you would. It has got
PricewaterhouseCoopers on the cover, so I am sure you can find out
about it when you get back.
Thank you for your responsiveness, Mr. Kies.
Mr. KIES. Certainly, Mr. Doggett.
[The information follows:]
[The Bond and Option Sales Strategy (Boss) plan is being re-
tained in the Committee files.]
December 20, 1999
The Honorable Bill Archer
Committee on Ways and Means
U.S. House of Representatives
1102 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515–6348
Dear Mr. Chairman:
At the November 10, 1999, Ways and Means Committee hearing, Rep. Lloyd
Doggett (D–TX) asked me for further information with respect to matters regarding
my firm, PricewaterhouseCoopers. This letter is my response to Rep. Doggett’s re-
quest, and is being sent to you so that it may be included in the printed record for
the hearing. I am forwarding a copy of this letter to Rep. Doggett.
Rep. Doggett asked me then if my firm is promoting a so-called ‘‘Bond & Option
Sales Strategy’’ transaction. At the time of his question, I was not familiar with this
transaction, as I stated at the hearing. Since the hearing, I have inquired within
my firm about this matter. I also requested, and received from Rep. Doggett’s office,
a copy of a summary document apparently generated by PricewaterhouseCoopers re-
garding this hypothetical transaction and a draft of an opinion letter regarding the
tax consequences of the Bond & Option Sales Strategy.
I have learned the following. First, it is my understanding that
PricewaterhouseCoopers has not been engaged by any client to assist, advise, or oth-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00149 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
146
erwise consult on execution of the specific Bond & Option Sales Strategy transaction
outlined in the draft opinion letter that Rep. Doggett provided. Second, we did ad-
vise clients with respect to transactions similar to the one described in the draft
opinion involving different economic characteristics. Third, it is the position of my
firm that we will not issue an opinion on this transaction or such similar trans-
actions. Moreover, we have delivered no such opinions to any client.
Rep. Doggett also asked me about the fees charged by PricewaterhouseCoopers in
conjunction with the tax advice that we provide to clients. Specifically, Rep. Doggett
asked about the cost of the ‘‘30 mass-market products’’ that our partner Fernando
Murias was quoted in the December 14, 1998, edition of Forbes magazine as saying
my firm offers. Mr. Murias believes that his quoted comments were taken out of
context and my firm does not believe they accurately portray the firm or its prac-
tices.
In response to Rep. Doggett’s question, I am not aware, as an initial matter,
which specific services provided by PricewaterhouseCoopers were referred to by Mr.
Murias. Even if I was, the fees charged by my firm are held confidential with our
clients, and I would not be in a position to provide any specifics. That said, it is
true that my firm consults regularly on ways to minimize our clients’ tax liability
consistent with Federal, State and local, and international tax laws. It also is true
that some of these strategies have general applicability across our client base (e.g.,
reviewing a company’s tax accounting methods) and in that regard we offer these
services broadly. Other services we provide are specific to a client’s unique facts and
circumstances (e.g., consulting on a corporate reorganization) and thus are not ap-
plicable to a ‘‘mass market.’’ While there are no standard fees charged by my firm
with respect to our services, in all cases the firm’s fees are consistent with fees
charged by other professional tax advisors and consistent with the expectations of
our clients.
SINCERELY,
KENNETH J. KIES
cc: The Honorable Charles Rangel, Ranking Minority Member, Committee on
Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives
The Honorable Lloyd Doggett, U.S. House of Representatives
Jim Clark, Chief Tax Counsel, Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of
Representatives
John Buckley, Minority Tax Counsel, Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House
of Representatives
Lindy Paull, Chief of Staff, Joint Committee on Taxation
Jonathan Talisman, Acting Assistant Secretary (Tax Policy), Department of the
Treasury
f
Mr. MCCRERY. Mr. Kies, there were a number of questions
asked. I would be willing to give you time now to respond to those
questions if you so choose. If not, I have questions of my own.
Mr. KIES. I would be happy to answer your questions,
Mr.McCrery.
Mr. MCCRERY. Thank you.
Mr. Hariton, I was most interested in your comments about
Treasury employees and paying them more because of the expertise
needed. In fact, I think we could extend that maybe to the Ways
and Means Committee. We will talk about that later. What about
disclosure requirements? You didn’t seem to be in favor of much of
anything except letting the courts continue to work their magic.
What about disclosure requirements? Do we need more disclosure
requirements?
Mr. HARITON. We have the same difficulty I fear with disclosure
requirements that we had with substantive requirements which is,
in order to have them, we have to figure out what a corporate tax
shelter is. It is all very easy to say, well, disclose anything that is
a corporate tax shelter. And if you read, for example, the proposals
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00150 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
147
of Mr. Sax at the ABA, there is a long and detailed disclosure
signed by the CFO with a great deal of ceremony. But it turns out,
as the chairman was suggesting earlier, that when you go to figure
out what transactions this applies to, it turns out to apply to every-
thing and nothing. So that, if properly advised, basically we are en-
acting a rule that says every transaction done in America has to
be disclosed in detail by the CFO and signed.
Now—and you might well ask, who is going to write all those dis-
closures? And when they arrive in Washington who is going to read
them? And what are they going to do with them? That might all
be rather funny in a way, if it weren’t that we all understand as
practical people that none of that is ever going to happen. The
minute you enact that law it will be ignored and nobody will dis-
close anything because they can’t understand what they are sup-
posed to disclose. So what it will reduce to is that if and when the
IRS enforces a tax-abusive transaction, one of the things that they
will say is that you should have disclosed.
So to me we might as well go right to the heart of the issue and
talk about the penalties that are imposed on persons who are found
to have engaged in corporate tax shelters. I do not object, as I said
in my statement, or think it would be a mistake to propose, for ex-
ample, to raise the penalty for understatements arising from cor-
porate tax shelter transactions if Congress feels that the balance
is misplaced. I simply do not want Congress to enact legislation
that on its face, after some careful thought, cannot possibly help
in any way.
Mr. MCCRERY. Why do you think the American Bar Association
and the New York Bar Association are so seemingly adamantly in
favor of increased disclosure requirements?
Mr. HARITON. Well, everybody involved in this process I feel
means well, and I can’t speak to where anybody comes to their——
Mr. MCCRERY. I am not talking about their motive. I am talking
about why the difference. Why are such respected organizations as
the ABA and the New York Bar in favor of increased disclosure
and you make such compelling arguments against it? How do you
explain that? What compelled them to reach such a different con-
clusion?
Mr. HARITON. Well, I cannot—again, it is impossible for me to
say—I haven’t had enough discussions with Mr. Sax, for example,
to get the full benefit of his reasoning and perhaps I should.
I can tell you myself, based on my 15 years of experience in ad-
vising about the tax consequences of complex business trans-
actions, that it is impossible, as the chairman was suggesting ear-
lier, to give anybody any advice about what would or would not be
disclosable, right down to the fellow who is disincorporating to
avoid a second-level tax.
I can tell you, for example, that many of the transactions that
were done you would not think were tax abusive but were shut
down by Congress presumably would be picked up—for example,
Mirror Liquidations in the 1980s or just recently the so-called Mor-
ris Trust Transaction that was closed down, that is a spin-off fol-
lowed by a merger of one of the companies into another company.
Were these all disclosable transactions?
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00151 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
148
In a sense, the disclosable transactions would really be infinite.
And I don’t understand how we would all function on a going-for-
ward basis if we were to take seriously rules that say disclose any
transaction with a significant purpose of tax avoidance. That is
what I do for a living, is spend my time trying to figure out how
to structure transactions so that you pay less rather than more tax.
I do not want to—I think it would be a mistake for Congress to
enact a law which, because it couldn’t be complied with, encourages
taxpayers and their advisors to ignore the law.
Mr. MCCRERY. Is there anything—I will let you add to that in
just a minute.
Is there anything that enhanced disclosure requirements would
offer the IRS that they don’t now have access to in an audit?
Mr. HARITON. For practical reasons I honestly don’t think so.
And here is the practical reason: In order to make use of a disclo-
sure, one must examine it, ponder, think and analyze. There is no
machine down here in Washington that can receive disclosures and
sort them out in a pile, one abusive, nine okay, one abusive, nine
okay. And this takes time. That is administration. That is why ad-
ministration is the only answer to the problem.
Mr. MCCRERY. Mr. Kies.
Mr. KIES. Mr. McCrery, with all due respect to the previous
panel, it did not appear to me and it does not appear to me that
either the New York Bar or the ABA tax section have actually
taken the time to analyze the economic data as to whether there
is a problem with the erosion of the corporate tax base. I think
they are operating largely based on anecdotal experience.
If you noted, the last panel couldn’t even identify what is the cur-
rent level of corporate revenues. The only number thrown out was
$120 billion. The current level, as you can see, is $180 billion. And
I would have to just respectfully say that I don’t think either one
of those organizations have taken the time to examine the actual
macro-economic data as to where corporate revenues have gone
over the last 10 years to determine whether there is any funda-
mental erosion of the corporate tax base underway.
We believe that is a threshold question that needs to be an-
swered before one is launched off into a lot of statutory changes,
particularly when you realize that the Service has been quite suc-
cessful in combating problems within the last year through a series
of Tax Court decisions that have been favorable to the government.
I think Mr. Hariton noted something earlier I would just under-
score in this regard and that is corporate tax directors and cor-
porate professionals are reading those cases quite closely, and it is
foolish to think that they are not taking into account the direction
the courts are going in how they advise their clients. Because they
clearly are.
Mr. MCCRERY. Dr. Sullivan, I was somewhat surprised at your
conclusion that there is a trend of declining corporate tax revenues
to the Federal Government. And I was surprised because I imme-
diately—before listening to your testimony, I read the charts pro-
vided by Mr. Kies which indicate that, as a percent of GDP, cor-
porate revenues have actually increased since the early ’80s, fairly
consistently. And only this year, 1999, did we see a decrease from
2.2 percent of GDP to 2.1 percent of GDP.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00152 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
149
In light of—first of all, maybe these are wrong, but if you don’t
think they are wrong, then does that change your conclusion or do
you still stand by your conclusion that we have a trend of declining
corporate tax revenues?
Mr. SULLIVAN. Yes, I do. The reason is that corporate—we—just
put it simply, we had surging—we haven’t noticed this trend be-
cause the Treasury has been doing so well with so much money
coming in. And the question is relative to the amount of corporate
profits we should expect.
I was surprised to find this result myself. But when you look at
corporate profits and you look at how much they have gone up, you
just say receipts haven’t gone up commensurate with that. And
that is what is surprising.
You look at the order of magnitude, and if you—depending on
what type of chart you look at, it may look small, but it could be—
it easily could be a 10 or $20 billion shortfall. It could be more than
that.
Again, that is why I think it is important that the Committee at
least be aware of this with all the uncertainty around it that there
might be this problem. I wouldn’t want to you come to me 2 years
from now and say, why didn’t you tell me about this? There is
something going on. We are not sure.
If I may just add, it is very reminiscent of about 10 years ago
when foreign corporations doing business in the United States were
not paying any tax. We could clearly see that in the data, but we
didn’t know why. The inference was in transfer pricing, and we had
a big to-do about transfer pricing. It is really the same situation
here. We are observing something going on, we will never be able
to prove it by looking at the data, but we just need to keep that
in mind as we look at the overall situation.
Mr. MCCRERY. Mr. Kies, do you have any comment on that?
Mr. KIES. I would just cite you to our data, which really does
show, I think rather convincingly, corporate revenues are on an up
trend. There may be this small downturn for this year, which I
think is easily explainable because of depreciation. But when you
look at a number of factors like corporate revenues as a percent of
GDP, when you look at effective tax rates, the effective tax rate for
this year is expected to be 32.7 percent. That is well in line with
what we have seen over the past 10 years. It is higher than we saw
in 1980 when it was only 29.2 percent.
But I would say, consistent with Mr. Sullivan, and that is you
should continue to watch these numbers to determine whether
there is some fundamental problem. I guess what we are saying is
we don’t see it in the numbers that we have to date, that the cor-
porate revenue base appears to be quite vibrant and has been for
the past 10 years. But certainly part of the Committee’s responsi-
bility is to continue to monitor that situation.
Mr. MCCRERY. Yeah, I have to say I think we should monitor
them, but I am not inclined to agree with Dr. Sullivan that there
is a trend out there right now. Maybe if we get another 2 or 3
years of declining corporate receipts as a percent of GDP then we
could conclude that there is. But, right now, I am inclined to say
just watch it.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00153 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
150
Mr. Carpenter, you seem to be saying that there should be more
focus on the folks advising corporations and individuals on tax
shelters. Are you suggesting that we ought to consider penalties for
people who are advising corporations and individuals to enter into
these illegal transactions?
Mr. CARPENTER. I think that some bolstering of Circular 230
probably is in order. I am not an expert in the area, but I do be-
lieve that is appropriate.
However, I do not believe that going after the promoters or the
advisors is the ultimate answer. If there are no tax shelters to pro-
mote, there will be no promoters. So I do believe that in some fash-
ion or another there should be an effort made to reduce the
attractiveness or reduce the availability of the so-called corporate
tax shelters.
I think that some further disclosure would be appropriate, and
think that possibly some changes in the anti-abuse sections would
be appropriate. Particularly I think that consideration could be
given to modifying the rules on reasonable cause under Section
6664 so that there is an explicit exclusion for certain opinions that
are faulty or not-well-reasoned tax opinions. I know such changes
can get into a lot of issues, but I do think that there are some pos-
sibilities there.
I think there is also a possibility that one should consider mak-
ing the reasonable cause exception of 6664(c) available only to
transactions that are disclosed.
So I do think there are things that can be done that aren’t mas-
sive that would help put a chilling effect on these corporate tax
shelters. I don’t think that actions through the courts by them-
selves will do that, because it takes a long time. And the shelters
that are being sold now are very complex, and they are based, to
a certain extent at least, on confidentiality and the anticipation
that the transaction will not be discovered in audit. So that is the
reason I think some attention of this Committee is appropriate to
these matters, and hopefully a workable solution can be found.
Mr. MCCRERY. Are you not concerned about the costs to your
company of complying with such disclosure requirements?
Mr. CARPENTER. I am very concerned about it, but I am also con-
cerned that the fact that the rates that every taxpayer pays are
higher if others are avoiding tax in ways that are not contemplated
by the laws of this country.
So, yes, I do have some concern about the compliance costs. I
definitely am concerned about any rules that would require tax-
payers to do something within 30 days. I think that is a very dif-
ficult compliance requirement that should not be enacted if it is
being proposed. Compliance is a very difficult process in a large
corporation or for any taxpayer, and it is difficult enough to pull
all of the needed resources together to do an annual tax return.
But to have various rules requiring compliance within a 30-day pe-
riod after a transaction I think definitely should be avoided.
Mr. MCCRERY. I know you have said you have only read a sum-
mary of Mr. Doggett’s bill. Would you be so kind as to have some-
one on your staff look at it more carefully and advise us of particu-
larly the disclosure section of his legislation and see if you think
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00154 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
151
that is a reasonable requirement or if it is too onerous or just what
your comments would be? I would appreciate that.
Mr. CARPENTER. I would be very happy to do that.
[The information follows:]
November 30, 1999
The Honorable Jim McCrery
United States House of Representatives
2104 Rayburn House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515–1804
Re: Corporate Tax Shelters
Dear Congressman McCrery:
This letter responds to your request at the Ways and Means Committee hearing
on corporate tax shelters held on November 10, 1999. Specifically, you requested
that I consider the disclosure provisions of the ‘‘Doggett Bill’’ (H.R. 2255) and offer
my perspective about the reasonableness of those proposed disclosure requirements.
I now have had a chance to review the Doggett Bill in full and offer the following
comments on the disclosure provisions of that bill:
1. I strongly oppose any disclosure requirement other than a disclosure in the tax
return of the taxpayer for the year in which the transaction takes place. Requiring
disclosure within 30 days of a transaction is an unnecessary burden on the taxpayer
(annual returns and quarterly payments are all that should be required), and would
be useless unless the IRS is given large additional resources to scrutinize such dis-
closures.
2. The Doggett Bill would require taxpayers to disclose ‘‘appropriate documents
describing the transaction.’’ This requirement is vague, thus creating uncertainty for
taxpayers attempting to comply and also allowing taxpayers great latitude in their
disclosures, resulting in significant IRS time to analyze the disclosures.
3. The Doggett Bill also would require very extensive information to be filed with
the taxpayer’s return, which probably is more information than the IRS would find
useful or economical to analyze at that stage. Obviously, all of the details would
have to be provided to the IRS on audit, but I hope that there could be simpler tax
return disclosures that would be more useful to the IRS.
For the initial tax return disclosure, simple disclosure of the salient facts would
be preferable to the more burdensome Doggett Bill disclosure provisions. Because
any definition of a corporate tax shelter probably should consider the relationship
between any economic benefits and the anticipated tax benefits from the trans-
action, a simple disclosure requirement could include only (a) a brief description of
the transaction, (b) a disclosure of the transaction as a corporate tax shelter for ease
in identification by the IRS, and (c) a comparative disclosure of the economic and
tax benefits for the tax year in question and an estimate of such benefits over the
next ten years.
It is a pleasure to have this opportunity to provide a follow-up to the November
10 hearing.
VERY TRULY YOURS,
DANNY R. CARPENTER
f
Mr. MCCRERY. Mr. Doggett, we have a vote on. Thank you all
very much for appearing before us today, and we look forward to
working with all of you to address this situation. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:20 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]
[Submissions for the record follow:]
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00155 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
152
1This letter also addresses certain similar provisions in H.R. 2255, the proposed ‘‘Abusive Tax
Shelter Shutdown Act of 1999,’’ which was introduced on June 17, 1999.
November 5, 1999
The Honorable Bill Archer
Chair
House Ways & Means Committee
House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515
The Honorable William V. Roth, Jr.
Chair
Senate Finance Committee
United States Senate
Washington, DC 20510
The Honorable Charles B. Rangel
Ranking Minority Member
House Ways & Means Committee
House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515
The Honorable Daniel P. Moynihan
Ranking Minority Member
Senate Finance Committee
United States Senate
Washington, DC 20510
Charles O. Rossotti
Commissioner
Internal Revenue Service
Room 3000
1111 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20224
Jonathan Talisman
Acting Assistant Secretary, Tax Policy
Department of the Treasury
Room 3120
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20220
Dear Sirs:
We are writing to express our views on the provisions regarding corporate tax
shelters contained in the Administration’s Fiscal Year 2000 Budget Proposals (the
‘‘Administration Proposals’’), which were released in February of this year, along
with proposed modifications contained in the Treasury Department White Paper on
‘‘The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion, Analysis, and Legislative Pro-
posals’’ (the ‘‘White Paper’’), which was released on July 1, 1999. Our comments are
limited to the proposals relating to ‘‘tax shelters’’ generally, as opposed to the provi-
sions in the Administration Proposals addressing specific perceived abuses, such as
the proposal to modify the anti-abuse rules related to assumption of liabilities in
transactions under Section 351 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended
(the ‘‘Code’’) 1
As discussed in more detail below, we share the Treasury Department’s concern
about the recent proliferation of corporate tax shelters and understand the motiva-
tion behind the Administration Proposals, as modified by the White Paper (as so
modified, the ‘‘Treasury Proposals’’). In this regard, we generally endorse the pro-
posals for enhanced disclosure requirements and the increase in the ‘‘substantial un-
derstatement’’ penalty applicable to corporate tax shelters. However, we differ from
the Treasury Department insofar as we believe that all existing tools for enforce-
ment, along with enhanced disclosure requirements and penalties, should be utilized
before attempting to combat these perceived abuses by permitting the Internal Rev-
enue Service to disallow tax benefits based upon characterization of a transaction
as a ‘‘tax avoidance transaction,’’ without regard to the normally applicable sub-
stantive provisions of the Code. We also disagree with the provisions in the Treas-
ury Proposals that target not just the corporate taxpayers seeking benefits from ‘‘tax
shelters,’’ but the advisers and tax-exempt parties involved in these transactions.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00156 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
153
2See, e.g., the cover story in the December 14, 1998 edition of Forbes.
3See, e.g., Notice 97–21 and Prop. Treas. Reg. §1.7701(l)–3 (addressing fast-pay stock); Section
3001 of Pub. L. 106–36 (modifying applicability of Section 357(c) to asset transfers subject to
liabilities).
CONCERNS WITH THE GENERAL APPROACH OF THE TREASURY PROPOSALS TO DENYING
TAX BENEFITS ASSOCIATED WITH ‘‘TAX SHELTERS’’
The Treasury Proposals would disallow tax benefits associated with transactions
in which the reasonably expected pre-tax benefits are insignificant in comparison to
the reasonably expected net tax benefits, as well as certain financing transactions.
We agree with the Treasury Department’s concerns about the aggressive mar-
keting of corporate tax shelters, which has resulted in a great deal of publicity not
only in the tax press, but in the general business press.2 Although corrective regula-
tions or legislative amendments have been proposed to rectify many of the alleged
abuses after they have come to light,3 the Treasury Department apparently fears
that abusive transactions that have already taken place will be grandfathered by
specific regulatory and legislative remedies and that other transactions will go un-
detected. As a result, the Treasury Department apparently believes that a more gen-
eral anti-abuse rule will give the Internal Revenue Service the ability to more effec-
tively prevent and combat abuses.
We concur with the Treasury Department that heavily promoted corporate tax
shelters, which often have little or no non-tax economic motivation and rely on very
aggressive, and often dubious, technical interpretations of the Code and regulations,
pose serious problems for the tax system. Even aside from the potential for corpora-
tions to realize tax savings that are unwarranted from a policy standpoint, publicity
about these transactions creates a damaging public perception that the tax system
is unfair.
Nonetheless, we are not convinced that the approach to disallowing tax benefits
taken by the Treasury Proposals is warranted. This is particularly so in light of
what appears to be a lack of empirical evidence as to the amount of revenue that
has been lost by the Treasury due to claimed tax benefits that would be disallowed
under the Treasury Proposals but are otherwise allowable. Our sense is that many
of the aggressive tax-motivated transactions currently being marketed are vulner-
able to attack under present law, as a result of which many taxpayers that have
been approached by investment bankers and other promoters have decided against
proceeding with these transactions. The Internal Revenue Service’s potential ability
under current law successfully to attack abusive transactions that actually have
been implemented further complicates any effort at producing meaningful revenue
estimates of the impact of the Treasury Proposals.
The Treasury Proposals, insofar as they would disallow tax benefits arising from
a broadly defined class of tax avoidance transactions, represent a significant depar-
ture from current law. The proposed anti-tax shelter rules clearly go well beyond
existing anti-avoidance provisions of the Code and regulations, such as Treas. Reg.
§1.1502–13(h), that are limited to preventing attempts to avoid the purposes of spe-
cific substantive rules. The scope of transactions potentially covered by the Treasury
Proposals is far broader than Section 269 of the Code, which addresses only limited
types of acquisitions of corporate control and carryover basis acquisitions of assets
undertaken with the principal purpose of obtaining tax benefits that would not oth-
erwise be available. Even the partnership anti-abuse regulations of Treas. Reg.
§1.701–2, which are extremely broad and have themselves been the subject of sub-
stantial criticism, are at least on their face limited to transactions that are deemed
to be inconsistent with the intent of Subchapter K of the Code. By contrast, the
Treasury Proposals’ anti-tax shelter provisions are not limited to transactions which
are inconsistent with the generally applicable substantive rules of the Code and reg-
ulations or with the intent of such rules. The Treasury Proposals also go signifi-
cantly beyond the existing judicial economic substance and business purpose doc-
trines. These doctrines are generally understood to apply only to transactions that
are devoid of any economic substance or business purpose. The Treasury Proposals,
on the other hand, would require a vaguely defined weighing of tax and non-tax mo-
tivations.
Our most fundamental objection to the Treasury Proposals’ anti-tax shelter provi-
sions is that they would create enormous uncertainty and would have a chilling ef-
fect on transactions that incorporate entirely appropriate tax planning. Tax consid-
erations play a major role in many business decisions. The U.S. business and finan-
cial environment is extremely complex, which has inevitably resulted in the develop-
ment of an equally complex set of tax laws. Nonetheless, with sufficient effort, it
generally is possible to reach a reasonable level of confidence as to the tax con-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00157 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
154
4This is, of course, a one-way street. Taxpayers would not be given a similar right to insist
on a deviation from the normal rules where they result in some ‘‘unfair’’ or ‘‘irrational’’ negative
result. Although taxpayers can often plan their affairs and structure transactions in such a way
as to avoid these adverse outcomes, this is not always possible even for well-advised taxpayers.
5 In Compaq, the government prevailed not only in disallowing the claimed tax benefits, but
in assessing a negligence penalty.
6ACM involved use by the taxpayer of provisions in the installment sale regulations which
the Internal Revenue Service announced in Notice 90–56, 1990–2 C.B. 344, would be amended.
Compaq and IES Industries involved claims of credits for foreign taxes withheld from dividends
on stock held for periods that would have fallen short of the subsequently enacted holding period
requirements of Section 901(k) of the Code. Similarly, in Winn-Dixie, the court disallowed
claimed interest deductions arising from a corporate-owned life insurance program of a type that
was addressed in post-transaction amendments to Section 264 of the Code.
7 See Tax Notes, April 12, 1999, p. 188.
sequences of a given set of actions. This level of certainty, which is extremely impor-
tant to business planning, would be severely undermined by enactment of the Treas-
ury Proposals. The anti-tax shelter provisions would permit the Internal Revenue
Service to override the generally applicable substantive tax rules based upon inher-
ently uncertain assessments of the likely pre-tax and tax benefits to be derived from
a transaction or the perceived propriety of reductions in income.4 As a result, there
would be a serious risk that legitimate tax planning in the context of bona fide busi-
ness transactions would be frustrated.
We believe that abusive tax shelters can be more effectively and appropriately
combated through a more traditional approach along with increased penalties and
stepped-up enforcement. Addressing specific provisions of the Code and regulations
ultimately is a more effective way of addressing abusive transactions because it pro-
duces more predictable results. In addition, because many corporate tax shelters are
designed to take advantage of provisions that, in other contexts, can produce results
that are unfairly detrimental to taxpayers, an approach that corrects the distortions
that produce these results can enhance the overall fairness of the tax system and
benefit taxpayers as well as the government. Moreover, although we recognize that
changes to legislation and regulations may not be effective with respect to trans-
actions that have already been consummated, many such transactions, if they are
perceived as abusive corporate tax shelters, can be attacked successfully through
vigorous enforcement of current law.
Not only can the Internal Revenue Service challenge transactions using technical
arguments that may be available with respect to specific provisions of the Code and
regulations, under current law it can avail itself of arguments such as the business
purpose, economic substance, and substance over form doctrines and the clear reflec-
tion of income principle. The government successfully used this approach in a num-
ber of recent cases, including ACM Partnership v. Commissioner, 157 F.3d 231 (3rd
Cir. 1998), Compaq Computer Corp. v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 17 (1999), Winn-
Dixie Stores, Inc. v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 21 (1999), and IES Industries, Inc.
v. United States (N.D. Iowa, No. C97–206, 1999). These cases are clear examples
of effective actions by the Internal Revenue Service to combat perceived abuses
under current law.5 Significantly, the Internal Revenue Service in all of these cases
successfully attacked transactions raising issues which had also been effectively ad-
dressed on a prospective basis by administrative or legislative actions.6 These cases
thus cut against the assertion by some advocates of the Treasury Proposals that
‘‘piecemeal’’ changes in the law are inadequate because prior transactions are grand-
fathered and go unchallenged.
The Treasury Department can also reduce the risk that corporate tax shelters will
go undetected by promulgating regulations to implement the 1997 changes to the
tax shelter registration requirements of Section 6111 of the Code. Perhaps more fun-
damentally, we believe that the Internal Revenue Service should be given adequate
resources to support its enforcement activities. One of the factors weighed by tax-
payers in deciding whether to enter into aggressive tax-motivated transactions is
the likelihood of being audited. The better the enforcement of existing rules, the
higher the likelihood of audit, and the less likely taxpayers are to enter into abusive
transactions. A reversal of the recently reported drop in audit activity 7 would go
a long way toward not only combating tax shelters, but increasing compliance in
non-shelter situations.
SPECIFIC COMMENTS ON THE TREASURY PROPOSALS
Although the Treasury Proposals have not yet been reduced to specific legislative
language, their description in the ‘‘General Explanations of the Administration’s
Revenue Proposals’’ (the ‘‘General Explanation’’) and the White Paper gives rise to
a number of troublesome issues.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00158 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
155
8H.R. 2255 includes a similar definition of ‘‘noneconomic tax attribute,’’ which would include
any deduction, loss, or credit arising from any transaction unless the transaction changes the
taxpayer’s economic position (apart from federal income tax consequences) in a ‘‘meaningful
way’’ and the present value of the reasonably expected potential income (and risk of loss) from
the transaction is ‘‘substantial’’ in relationship to the present value of the tax benefits claimed.
9White Paper, p. 96.
10 Id., n. 35
Definition of ‘‘tax avoidance transaction.’’
The Treasury Proposals generally are aimed at ‘‘tax avoidance transactions,’’ a
term that includes two general categories of transactions. The first category includes
‘‘any transaction in which the reasonably expected pre-tax profit (determined on a
present value basis, after taking into account foreign taxes as expenses and trans-
action costs) of the transaction is insignificant relative to the reasonably expected
net tax benefits (i.e., tax benefits in excess of the tax liability arising from the trans-
action, determined on a present value basis) of such transaction.’’ 8 Under the origi-
nal Administration Proposals, the definition of a tax avoidance transaction would
also have included certain transactions involving ‘‘the improper elimination or sig-
nificant reduction of tax on economic income.’’ The White Paper would replace this
second category of the tax shelter definition with an additional category of tax
avoidance transaction similar to that set forth in H.R. 2255. This new second cat-
egory would encompass financing transactions in which the deductions claimed by
the taxpayer for any period are significantly in excess of the economic return real-
ized by the person providing the capital.
This definition is extremely problematic to the extent that it would be employed
to disallow otherwise allowable tax benefits, thus affecting taxpayers’ underlying tax
liabilities, as opposed to merely serving as a benchmark for the imposition of pen-
alties with respect to benefits that are otherwise disallowed. At the most basic level,
it is totally unclear what it means for the reasonably expected pre-tax profit to be
‘‘insignificant’’ relative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits. ‘‘Insignificant’’
could mean less than 40 percent, less than 25 percent, or even less than 10 percent.
Given that every dollar of deductible expense in the most straightforward trans-
action results in a thirty-five cent tax savings for top-bracket corporate taxpayers,
the threshold of ‘‘insignificance,’’ if set too high, is very quickly met. Moreover, in
most business transactions, the ‘‘reasonably expected pre-tax profit’’ is extremely dif-
ficult to predict, and the relationship between pre-tax profit and net tax benefits
often is highly dependent upon the success of the venture.
The proposed definition of tax avoidance transaction has substantial potential for
overbreadth. The economics of many straightforward commercial transactions, such
as ‘‘plain vanilla’’ leveraged leases of aircraft to domestic airlines, which are heavily
dependent upon tax savings and often produce returns without regard to tax con-
sequences that are less than returns on ‘‘risk-free’’ investments in United States
government obligations, might fall within the first category of the definition of a tax
avoidance transaction, despite the fact that such arrangements generally are not
perceived as abusive tax shelters. Many internal restructurings of corporate groups
intended to enhance tax efficiency would also appear to fall within the literal terms
of the definition, because there often is no pre-tax motivation. Similarly, a sale of
a high basis, low value asset at a loss could produce tax savings substantially in
excess of any pre-tax economic benefit. The Treasury Proposals do provide that a
‘‘tax benefit,’’ while including ‘‘a reduction, exclusion, avoidance, or deferral of tax,
or an increase in a refund,’’ excludes ‘‘a tax benefit clearly contemplated by the ap-
plicable provision (taking into account the Congressional purpose for such provision
and the interaction of such provision with other provisions of the Code).’’ The scope
of this exclusion is, however, extremely uncertain. It can be argued that any tax
benefit expressly provided in the Code must have been ‘‘clearly contemplated,’’ but
this presumably is not what was intended by the Treasury Proposals, because they
then would be rendered almost completely meaningless. On the other hand, it can
equally well be argued that very few tax benefits are ‘‘clearly contemplated’’ in the
context of a particular transaction, since Congress typically promulgates rules of
general applicability rather than rules aimed at specific transactions. The White
Paper attempts to provide some assurance by enumerating the low-income housing
credit and deductions generated by ‘‘standard leveraged leases’’ as examples of bene-
fits that normally would meet the tax avoidance transaction definition but are not
subject to disallowance.9 Even this apparent concession, however, is limited by a
statement to the effect that tax benefits generated by leveraged leasing activity re-
quire careful analysis as to whether such benefits are clearly contemplated and that
some such transactions may indeed be tax avoidance transactions.10
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00159 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
156
11H.R. 2255, by providing that each transaction which is part of a series of related trans-
actions and each step in a multi-step transaction must be tested both individually and on an
overall basis, appears to impose a particularly harsh standard in this regard.
The portion of the definition dealing with financing transactions is also troubling.
As with the first prong of the definition, there is a great deal of pressure on deter-
mining the ‘‘significance’’ of a discrepancy between the taxpayer’s deductions and
the capital provider’s economic return. A further flaw is that the definition picks up
transactions where there is a discrepancy for any period rather than looking at the
life of the transaction. Finally, categorizing a financing transaction as a tax avoid-
ance transaction is fundamentally unfair where the discrepancy between the tax-
payer’s deductions and the capital provider’s economic return results from applica-
tion of tax accounting principles embodied in the Code or regulations, especially
where the capital provider is a U.S. taxpayer and suffers income inclusions that
match the taxpayer’s deductions.
Finally, it appears that the determination of whether a given transaction is a tax
avoidance transaction is highly dependent on how the transaction itself is defined.
This is a particularly difficult issue in the case of multi-step transactions, which can
be viewed either as a single transaction or as a series of separate transactions, each
of which must be separately tested for ‘‘tax avoidance.’’ Under the latter approach,
by separately examining each element of an integrated transaction, the Internal
Revenue Service could effectively require taxpayers to choose the least tax-efficient
means of achieving a given business objective.11
In a similar vein, it is unclear whether the tax avoidance transaction definition
is intended to apply, and if so how it would be applied, to tax-favored disposition
techniques, such as the redemption transactions that were the target of the 1997
amendments to Section 1059 of the Code. In many such cases, the decision to dis-
pose of the underlying business is motivated almost entirely by non-tax business
reasons, whereas the choice of a particular disposition structure may be principally
tax-driven. It is also difficult to see how the comparison of pre-tax profit and net
tax benefits would be applied to such a transaction.
Because of its inherent uncertainties and dependence upon subjective administra-
tive and judicial determinations, the ‘‘tax avoidance transaction’’ definition as a
practical matter would likely boil down to an ‘‘I know it when I see it’’ determina-
tion, which is by its very nature in the eyes of the beholder. As a result, the Treas-
ury Proposals would carry a substantial risk of being overinclusive or underinclusive
in their actual application, making their practical effect extremely hard to predict.
Because planning to minimize taxes is such an integral part of business trans-
actions, transactions that most people would not think of as ‘‘tax shelters’’ could be
subject to attack. The possibility of such a result could deter risk-averse taxpayers
from entering into perfectly appropriate, economically motivated but tax advan-
tageous transactions.
Denial of tax benefits in the case of tax avoidance transactions.
The Treasury Proposals would provide for the disallowance of any deduction, cred-
it, exclusion or other allowance obtained in a tax avoidance transaction. For the rea-
sons discussed above, we believe that it is inappropriate for substantive tax liability
to be determined based upon inherently vague definitions of tax avoidance trans-
actions rather than specific statutory rules. In addition to our objections, discussed
above, to the definition of a ‘‘tax avoidance transaction’’ in the Treasury Proposals,
we believe that this provision would provide the Internal Revenue Service and ulti-
mately the courts with overly broad discretion to determine taxpayers’ tax liabil-
ities. The original Administration Proposals would have given the Secretary author-
ity to disallow tax benefits obtained in tax avoidance transactions. Although the
White Paper proposes to modify the Administration Proposals by providing for a
self-operative disallowance provision, the Internal Revenue Service would still as a
practical matter have discretion as to whether to seek to apply the provision. The
White Paper’s modification is likely merely to shift the ultimate discretionary au-
thority inherent in the disallowance provision from the administrative level to the
judicial level. Once a transaction is classified as a tax avoidance transaction, it ap-
pears that all associated deductions, credits, exclusions, or other allowances other-
wise available from the transaction, as opposed to only those benefits that are
viewed as somehow ‘‘inappropriate’’ or the net tax savings otherwise resulting from
a transaction, are subject to potential disallowance. In the context of a multi-step
transaction, this puts further pressure on appropriately defining the scope of the
‘‘transaction’’ that is determined to be a tax avoidance transaction. The determina-
tion of the taxpayer’s tax liability thus appears to become completely a matter of
administrative and/or judicial discretion.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00160 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
157
12 In this regard, we object to the approach of H.R. 2255, which would impose the increased
penalty with respect to any disallowed ‘‘noneconomic tax attribute’’ which is not disclosed, rather
than tying the increased penalty to a disclosure requirement based on an objective standard.
Disclosure requirements.
The Treasury Proposals would require disclosure of potential corporate tax shel-
ters, both within 30 days after completion of the transaction and on the taxpayer’s
return. The White Paper proposes that the disclosure requirement should be trig-
gered by the presence of certain ‘‘filters,’’ such as book/tax differences, rescission,
unwind, or insurance arrangements related to tax benefits, confidentiality agree-
ments, and contingent fees payable to advisers, that are commonly associated with
corporate tax shelters.
As long as the criteria for determining when transactions must be disclosed are
objective and reasonably well-defined, as opposed to being based upon falling within
the inherently vague definition of ‘‘tax avoidance transaction,’’ we are in favor of
these disclosure requirements. We believe that the proposed disclosure requirements
would serve two useful functions. First, in the case of taxpayers that are not rou-
tinely audited, disclosure would reduce their ability to successfully play the ‘‘audit
lottery’’ and thereby receive unwarranted tax benefits simply because the trans-
action is never detected. Second, requiring prompt disclosure will alert the Internal
Revenue Service to potentially abusive transactions and enable it to respond more
promptly through legislative proposals or changes in regulations. In this regard, the
enhanced disclosure requirements greatly diminish the need for the Treasury Pro-
posals’ provisions that would disallow tax benefits based upon characterization of
a transaction as a tax avoidance transaction without regard to generally applicable
principles of substantive tax law. It is important, however, that the class of trans-
actions subject to the disclosure requirement be reasonably narrow in order to en-
sure that the disclosure requirement is limited to transactions that are likely to
have a potential for tax avoidance. Otherwise, the Internal Revenue Service will be
flooded with disclosure forms regarding transactions with no real abuse potential,
and the purpose of the disclosure requirements will be largely defeated.
The Treasury Proposals would also require disclosure of any transaction that a
taxpayer reports in a manner different from its form. Although such transactions
potentially involve some form of tax arbitrage, abusive tax shelters almost univer-
sally involve taxpayers reporting transactions in accordance with their form in a
manner that is inconsistent with their substance rather than vice versa. We there-
fore question whether this additional disclosure requirement serves any real pur-
pose. Nonetheless, it is possible that the Treasury Department is concerned that
transactions which are reported differently from their form may involve potential
for abuse, particularly in cross-border situations where taxpayers attempt to take
advantage of different characterizations of the same transaction by different juris-
dictions. Accordingly, in cases in which the form of the transaction is unambiguous,
we do not object to this proposal.
Modifications to substantial understatement penalty for corporate tax shelters.
The Treasury Proposals would redefine corporate tax shelters for purposes of the
substantial understatement penalty. A ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ would be defined as
‘‘any entity, plan, or arrangement (to be determined based on all facts and cir-
cumstances) in which a direct or indirect corporate participant attempts to obtain
a tax benefit in a tax avoidance transaction.’’ Unless the taxpayer complies with the
disclosure requirements, the applicable penalty would be doubled from 20 percent
to 40 percent, with an additional fixed amount penalty for failure to disclose, and
the ‘‘reasonable cause’’ exception would be unavailable. In the case of a tax shelter
where there is disclosure, the penalty would remain at 20 percent and the reason-
able cause exception would be available, but only if the taxpayer had a reasonable
belief that it had a ‘‘strong’’ probability of success on the merits (as compared to
the current ‘‘more likely than not’’ standard applicable to tax shelters). Although the
White Paper is not clear in this regard, we assume that the 20% penalty and rea-
sonable cause exception would apply in the case of a tax shelter for which disclosure
was not required.
We are in favor of increasing the penalty provided that the substantive tax rules
are reasonably well-defined and the increased penalty can be avoided by complying
with objectively defined disclosure requirements.12 An increased penalty would
serve as a more effective deterrent to taxpayers that engage in overly aggressive
transactions in the belief that they may not be audited and that, even if they are
audited, they will not be substantially worse off if their claimed benefits are dis-
allowed than they would have been if the benefits had never been claimed, particu-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00161 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
158
13Again, we believe that H.R. 2255 goes too far by eliminating the reasonable cause exception
even where there is disclosure.
larly in view of taxpayers’ expectations that they will be able to negotiate a settle-
ment during the course of an audit.
Our concerns with the proposed penalty provision stem principally from our con-
cerns, discussed above, about the broad substantive discretion given the Internal
Revenue Service and the courts to disallow tax benefits associated with tax avoid-
ance transactions. The proposed tax shelter definition on balance is a reasonable
one, and its inherent ambiguities are much less troubling, to the extent that the
definition applies only for penalty purposes as opposed to serving as a basis for
making determinations of underlying tax liability and as long as the stricter pen-
alties can be avoided by taxpayers that comply with clearly defined disclosure re-
quirements. In fact, the proposed definition represents an improvement over the
current definition of ‘‘tax shelter’’ in Section 6662(d), which focuses on a ‘‘significant
purpose’’ to avoid or evade Federal income tax. The current definition thus poten-
tially encompasses transactions that are motivated primarily by non-tax economic
considerations but also involve a significant tax planning—and hence tax avoid-
ance—purpose.
As long as the disclosure requirements are triggered by bright-line standards that
are easily complied with, rather than being triggered by the Treasury Proposals’
broad definition of ‘‘tax avoidance transaction,’’ we believe that eliminating the rea-
sonable cause exception where the taxpayer fails to comply with those requirements
is an appropriate mechanism for encouraging disclosure.13 We believe, however, that
the reasonable cause exception, which already is very narrow in the case of cor-
porate tax shelters, should be retained in its current form in cases where the disclo-
sure requirements are met. The proposed ‘‘strong probability of success’’ test would
impose a virtually insurmountable bar to avoiding the penalty. Under current law,
Treas. Reg. § 1.6664–4(e) provides that tax shelter items of corporations satisfy the
reasonable cause exception only if the taxpayer’s position is supported by substan-
tial authority and the taxpayer reasonably believed that it was more likely than not
to prevail; even then, a further inquiry into more subjective criteria relating to busi-
ness purpose and other factors is required. It is hard to see how preservation of this
narrow exception, which imposes a high standard on taxpayers and protects only
those acting in good faith, would hinder unduly the Internal Revenue Service’s at-
tempt to combat tax abuse. Moreover, if substantial authority exists to support a
position taken by a taxpayer and the taxpayer has received a ‘‘more likely than not’’
opinion from a reputable adviser who is fully apprised of the relevant facts, it is
difficult to perceive how that position could be characterized as sufficiently abusive
to merit a penalty, regardless of the relative magnitude of tax benefits as compared
to pre-tax profits.
Taxation of income from corporate tax shelters involving tax-indifferent parties.
The Treasury Proposals would also impose tax on income realized by ‘‘tax indif-
ferent parties’’ in connection with corporate tax shelters. The intent is to prevent
the shifting of taxable income to foreign persons, Native American tribal organiza-
tions, tax-exempt organizations, and domestic corporations with expiring loss or
credit carryovers. The income earned by the tax-indifferent party would be subject
to tax, although the incidence of the tax would depend upon the nature of the tax-
indifferent party. In the case of tax-exempt organizations, domestic corporations,
and foreign persons not entitled to treaty protection, the tax would be imposed di-
rectly on the tax-indifferent party. In the case of Native American tribal organiza-
tions and foreign persons entitled to treaty benefits, on the other hand, the tax
would be collected only from other participants who are not exempt from tax.
We do not believe that this provision is appropriate. For the most part, tax-indif-
ferent parties to tax shelter-type arrangements do not realize benefits that are suffi-
cient to justify changing the taxing regime applicable to them. Indeed, in many
cases, the tax-indifferent party may not have sufficient information to assess the tax
benefits available to the corporate taxpayer and thus to determine whether the pro-
posed tax shelter provision would potentially be applicable. If a transaction involves
an inappropriate shifting of income from a taxable corporation to a tax-indifferent
party, the proper solution would be a reallocation of income to the taxable party.
In proposing to collect tax on income realized by treaty-eligible foreign persons and
Native American tribal organizations from the taxable corporate participants, the
Treasury Department appears to recognize the merits of this approach in at least
limited contexts, although the proposal is unclear as to which corporate participants
are subject to tax.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00162 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
159
Regardless of the incidence of the tax, the proposed provision could result in sub-
stantial overkill. Although the White Paper would narrow the provision in the origi-
nal Administration Proposals by applying the provision only to tax-indifferent par-
ties that are ‘‘trading on their tax exemption,’’ it appears that all the income earned
by such a tax-indifferent party, not just income that is artificially shifted away from
the corporate taxpayer through implementation of an abusive tax shelter, would be
subject to tax. For example, where a tax-indifferent party provides funds as part of
a transaction, it appears that all of its income from the transaction—including the
normal rate of return on its investment—would be subject to tax. There is no jus-
tification for effectively changing the basis for taxation of this type of income earned
by a tax-indifferent party on account of tax benefits realized by an unrelated cor-
porate tax shelter participant, even if the tax is imposed on the taxable corporate
participant.
Finally, we believe that the proposed provision’s definition of a ‘‘domestic corpora-
tion with expiring loss or credit carryovers’’ that would be treated as a tax-indif-
ferent party is overbroad. Loss and credit carryforwards that are more than three
years old would generally be treated as expiring. Aside from the fact that such
carryforwards may not be in serious danger of expiring, it is not clear from the Gen-
eral Explanation that application of the provision is dependent upon the
carryforwards being available and sufficient to offset the income from the trans-
action in question.
Imposition of excise tax on certain fees.
The Treasury Proposals would impose a 25 percent excise tax on fees received by
promoters and advisers in connection with corporate tax shelters. The White Paper
proposes to delete a provision in the original Administration Proposals that would
have made the fees non-deductible to the corporate tax shelter participant.
Aside from our general objections to the proposed definition of tax avoidance
transaction, we believe that imposing an excise tax on the recipients of fees is inap-
propriate. The provision appears broad enough to apply to underwriting and other
fees incurred in connection with a tax avoidance transaction, even if the particular
services involved bear only a tangential relationship to the tax avoidance purpose
and would have been incurred even without regard thereto. For example, a financ-
ing transaction with an improper tax avoidance purpose could involve underwriting
fees no greater than, and for services largely no different from, those that would
have been incurred in a less tax-efficient alternative transaction.
Moreover, promoters typically are rendering a service by presenting ideas, the
evaluation of which is the responsibility of taxpayers and their advisers. It is hard
to see why there should be a special tax regime applicable to these service providers.
Even if it were appropriate to impose special penalties on promoters, there is no
justification for imposing an excise tax on a taxpayer’s outside counsel or other tax
adviser, who typically is in the position of trying to give an unbiased assessment
of a proposed transaction and is not receiving a contingent fee. The risk of being
subject to an excise tax has the potential to adversely affect an adviser’s ability to
give objective tax advice. The White Paper states that the penalty would not apply
to a tax professional that advises a client that a transaction is not supportable or
cautions the client not to proceed with the transaction. It is completely inappro-
priate for the Treasury Department to use the threat of a tax penalty on the adviser
to influence the advice that the adviser gives to his or her clients. It is hard to see
how the goal of sound administration of the tax system is advanced if advisers can
only avoid penalties by refusing to provide proper and objective tax advice to their
clients.
Imposing an excise tax on fee recipients also would present potentially insur-
mountable procedural problems, because the imposition of the tax is dependent upon
the outcome of the determination of the corporate taxpayer’s liability. Not permit-
ting the fee recipient to contest and if necessary to litigate the underlying tax liabil-
ity would be a denial of due process. Conversely, allowing the fee recipient to par-
ticipate in proceedings against the corporate taxpayer would be unfair to the tax-
payer and potentially would be a significant impediment to settlement of disputes.
Although the White Paper appears to acknowledge this concern by stating that ‘‘ap-
propriate due process procedures’’ would be provided, it is unclear how this could
be effected.
Effective dates.
Under the Treasury Proposals, all the provisions discussed above would be effec-
tive on the date of first Committee action. Even if these provisions were appropriate
as a general matter (which we believe they are not), it is indisputable that they rep-
resent a major change in current law and require substantial refinement. Under
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00163 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
160
those circumstances, we see absolutely no justification for a pre-enactment effective
date.
* * *
If you have any questions regarding the foregoing, please feel free to contact the
undersigned at (212) 837–6315.
RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED,
ANDREW H. BRAITERMAN
CHAIR
cc:Lindy L. Paull
Mark Prater
Timothy L. Hanford
John Buckley
Russ Sullivan
COMMITTEE ON TAXATION OF BUSINESS ENTITIES
ANDREW H. BRAITERMAN, CHAIR 14
LOUIS H. TUCHMAN, VICE-CHAIR 15
MARY B. FLAHERTY, SECRETARY
f
Statement of the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company,
Springfield, Massachusetts
Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company is the eleventh largest life insur-
ance company in the United States, doing business throughout the nation. The Com-
pany offers life and disability insurance, deferred and immediate annuities, and
pension employee benefits. Through its affiliates, Massachusetts Mutual offers mu-
tual funds and investment services. The Company serves more than two million pol-
icyholders nationwide and, with its affiliates, has more than $175 billion in assets
under management. Massachusetts Mutual is very concerned about efforts to cat-
egorize business life insurance as a corporate tax shelter. This sweeping generaliza-
tion ignores the legitimate uses of business life insurance and the fact that Congress
has already eliminated the potential for businesses to abuse the tax benefits associ-
ated with cash value life insurance.
In its revenue proposals for the fiscal year 2000 budget, the Administration iden-
tified cash value life insurance as a tax shelter that provides unjustifiable benefits
to business policyholders. With recent testimony before this Committee, the staff of
the Joint Committee on Taxation repeated the charge that business life insurance
is just another corporate tax shelter. In support of this claim, Joint Committee staff
cited the recent Winn-Dixie decision which denied an interest deduction for large-
scale borrowing of policy cash values. However, there was no mention of the fact
that this case involved transactions that are no longer viable under the Internal
Revenue Code.
A tax shelter has been defined to exclude any ‘‘tax benefit clearly contemplated
by the applicable provision’’ of current tax law. Over the past few years, Congress
has repeatedly examined the tax treatment of business life insurance. The current
rules are the product of this extensive review.
Congress weighed the tax benefits for business life insurance when it passed
amendments to Section 264 of the Internal Revenue Code. Congress eliminated the
use of life insurance for tax arbitrage. There are clear-cut and effective rules that
now limit the ability of a business to deduct interest on debt when it holds cash
value life insurance. Following amendments enacted in 1996, federal law allows a
business to take an interest deduction for loans against only those insurance policies
covering the life of either a 20% owner of the business or another key person. No
more than 20 individuals may qualify as key persons and a business can deduct in-
terest on no more than $50,000 of policy debt per insured life. Policies issued before
June 21, 1986 are grandfathered from this rule.
Two years ago, Congress examined the tax treatment of general debt where a
business also happened to hold cash value life insurance. Based on this review, it
created a tax penalty for businesses that hold life insurance on their debtors, cus-
tomers or any insureds other than their employees, officers, directors or 20% own-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00164 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
161
14Member of the Committee principally responsible for the drafting of the letter.
15Member of the Subcommittee that prepared the letter. Sydney E. Unger, the former chair
of the Committee, also participated in the preparation of this letter. The assistance of Mary B.
Flaherty is gratefully acknowledged.
ers. Last year, as part of its fiscal year 1999 budget, the Administration proposed
extending the penalty to all business life insurance policies other than those cov-
ering 20% owners. Congress re-examined the treatment of unrelated business debt
and rejected the Administration’s proposal last year. Earlier this year, the Adminis-
tration submitted the same proposal, with no better tax policy justification than it
has offered in the past. However, this year, the Administration sought to cloak its
proposal as an attempt to eliminate a tax shelter.
Further changes in tax treatment would make cash value life insurance prohibi-
tively expensive for all businesses. Business life insurance serves many legitimate,
non-tax purposes. Life insurance provides a means for businesses to survive the
death of an owner, offering immediate liquidity for day-to-day maintenance of the
business or the funds to purchase the decedent’s interest from heirs who are unwill-
ing or incapable of continuing the business.
Businesses purchase life insurance to meet other needs in addition to funding
business buy-outs. A business must protect itself from the economic drain and insta-
bility caused by the loss of any major asset. The talents of its key personnel sustain
a business as a viable force in the economy. Life insurance provides businesses with
the means to protect the workplace by replacing revenues lost on the death of a key
person and by offsetting the costs of finding and training a suitable successor. Busi-
nesses use life insurance to provide survivor and post-retirement benefits to their
employees, officers and directors. As part of a supplemental compensation package,
these benefits help attract and retain talented and loyal personnel, the very individ-
uals who are crucial to the ongoing success of any business. Treating cash value life
insurance as a tax shelter would penalize a business that tried to take reasonable
measures to protect itself or to provide benefits for its employees.
The legitimate needs for workplace protection insurance have not altered in the
past three years. Nor will the business need for life insurance simply disappear if
business life insurance is treated as a tax shelter. However, the resulting effect for
businesses will be punitive. Term insurance does not provide businesses with a rea-
sonable alternative to cash value insurance. While often appropriate for temporary
arrangements, term insurance is both costly and unsuitable for long-range needs.
Application of the tax shelter stigma to cash value life insurance is an exceedingly
harsh punishment to impose on a business for taking prudent financial measures
to protect its valuable human assets or to provide benefits for its employees and re-
tirees.
Congress has repeatedly examined the tax treatment of business owned life insur-
ance. Amendments it has passed in the last several years have effectively curtailed
the use of life insurance for tax arbitrage. There is no reason to change the rules
yet again. There is no justification for penalizing businesses that purchase cash
value life insurance to safeguard their own well being or to provide benefits for their
workforce. Businesses use life insurance for legitimate purposes. Like any other tax-
payer, a business also needs some stability in the tax law in order to make long-
term plans for its own financial welfare and that of its employees. Congress revisit
the tax treatment of business life insurance, for the fourth time in four years, with
the express purpose of removing the carefully crafted rules set in the 1996 and 1997
tax acts.
f
Statement of Stephen L. Millman, and Steven C. Salch, Fulbright &
Jaworski L.L.P., Houston, Texas
Chairman Archer and Members of the Committee:
Fulbright & Jaworski L.L.P. is a law firm with offices in three States, the District
of Columbia, and two foreign countries. Our Firm is has been in existence for over
80 years, and has engaged in federal tax practice for over 70 years. Our tax practice
extends to all phases of state and federal taxation. We are involved with commercial
and financial transactional planning, documentation, and consummation, and de-
fense of taxpayers on examination, during administrative appeals, and in litigation.
Our clients include individuals, corporations, partnerships, trusts, estates, and fi-
nancial institutions, both domestic and foreign. We do not engage in the sale of ‘‘tax
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00165 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
162
1Study of Present-Law Penalty and Interest Provisions as Required by Section 3801 of the
IRS Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (Including Provisions Relating to Corporate Tax Shel-
ters) JCS–3–99 (July 7, 1999) (sometimes hereinafter referred to as the ‘‘Study’’ or the ‘‘JCT
Staff Study’’).
2 The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters—Discussion, Analysis and Legislative Proposals
(July 1, 1999) (sometimes hereinafter referred to as the ‘‘White Paper’’ or the ‘‘Treasury White
Paper’’).
3Report to Congress on Penalty and Interest Provisions of the Internal Revenue Code (Octo-
ber 25, 1999) (sometimes hereinafter referred to as the ‘‘Report’’ or the ‘‘Treasury Report’’).
products.’’ However, we have been exposed to those ‘‘products’’ in the course of rep-
resentation of clients to whom ‘‘products’’ have been offered.
We appreciate the opportunity to offer this written statement for consideration by
the Committee members and inclusion in the record of this hearing. We have fol-
lowed the evolution of the study of corporate tax shelters from the debate concerning
the enactment of the confidential corporate tax shelter registration provisions, the
preservation of those provisions in enactment of the federally-authorized tax practi-
tioner privilege provisions, the Study done by the Staff of the Joint Committee on
Taxation 1 , and the Treasury Department White Paper 2 and Penalty Report.3
Members of our firm have participated in various capacities in the activity of the
Section of Taxation of the American Bar Association concerning tax shelters since
the early 1980’s. We have defended individuals and entities who have invested in
tax shelters promoted by others. We also have defended individuals and entities
whose legitimate tax planning has been challenged by the Internal Revenue Service
upon examination. Those experiences, and the sense of the delicate balance that
must be maintained to preserve both the integrity of the tax system and the percep-
tion of taxpayers of the fairness of the tax system and tax administration, are the
foundation for the comments and suggestions in this statement.
We commend both the Joint Committee Staff and the Treasury Staff for the pro-
digious effort and thoughtful manner in which they have approached the issue of
corporate tax shelters. Their reports provide a solid basis from which to study that
problem. We also commend Chairman Archer for his recognition that any action,
legislative or administrative, intended to restrain the proliferation of ‘‘abusive cor-
porate tax shelters,’’ must be carefully and thoughtfully constructed and narrowly
focused to assure that legitimate business transactions are not chilled or opened to
challenge.
We believe the marketing of ‘‘tax product’’ including ‘‘corporate tax shelters,’’ and
particularly ‘‘products’’ marketed under confidentiality agreements demanded by,
and running in favor of, the promoter of such ‘‘products,’’ has become a substantial
problem. There are many reasons for this phenomenon. They include: the ineffi-
ciency and anticompetitive character of the federal corporation income tax; the pres-
sure the financial markets exert on domestic businesses to constantly grow cash
flow and profits; the apparent need of some tax practitioners to develop and market
‘‘products’’ to non-clients, as well as clients, in order to generate additional revenue
for themselves, and a penalty system that penalizes disclosure, rather than reward-
ing it.
It is important to approach these issues remembering that a taxpayer has no duty
to pay the maximum possible amount of tax that might be owed. Rather, a taxpayer
is free to arrange its affairs so that it pays the least amount of tax on the profits
it derives, consistent with the tax laws. Indeed, the tax law affords the taxpayer
many options as to form and timing of recognition of income or losses. Thus, the
first and most difficult task in approaching the problems posed by ‘‘abusive cor-
porate tax shelters’’ is that of defining ‘‘abusive corporate tax shelter.’’
We are concerned that the presently proposed definitions of ‘‘corporate tax shel-
ter’’ are too broad. For example, two generally-accepted types of transactions appear
to fall into the definitions currently under study. One is preferred stock which has
a dividend rate that is reset periodically and for which there is assurance to a cor-
porate holder that at each reset, someone will buy out its investment, at par, if it
so desires. Billions of dollars of this ‘‘remarketed preferred stock’’ are sold annually,
and it is a vital tool for corporate financial planning. But the combination of pre-
tax yield and a dividend received deduction is what makes the shares marketable.
The pre-tax yield, per se, is inadequate to attract buyers. The issues are marketed
by investment banks or underwriters whose fees are typically stated as a percentage
of the aggregate par value of, or dollars paid for, the preferred shares sold by the
issuer. Presumably, some mathematician could translate those transaction-size per-
centage fees to a percentage of dividends payable (since the stated dividend rate is
a percentage of the par value of the preferred). The original impetuses for these
transactions were proposals by investment bankers, backed by tax opinions.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00166 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
163
4See, e.g., Frank Lyon v. U.S., 435 U.S. 561 (1978).
Leveraged leasing shares most of the same characteristics. The tax investor’s pre-
tax profit is well below standard interest rates—it is the tax benefits that make the
transaction marketable on the economic terms employed. Most of the lessees would
not be able to use the depreciation if they did no leasing; the lessor can, and inter-
mediaries market the transactions and take a fee based on the transaction size that
could, mathematically, be translated into a percentage of depreciation deductions
available to the lessor. As the JCT Staff Study clearly points out, leveraged leasing
has been distinguished from other transactions by a special set of judicially-crafted
criteria to determine ownership, and tax treatment of the parties.4 Leveraged equip-
ment leasing is a vital economic tool to many industries, allowing manufacturers to
increase sales of products by lowering the cost of ownership to end users.
Both of these techniques have been blessed by the courts and the IRS. However,
since they would appear to be ‘‘tax shelters’’ under most of the presently-proposed
definitions, we are concerned that the proposed legislation might chill these finan-
cial planning tools and unnecessarily inhibit evolution of future tools that are simi-
lar in effect. Thus, we urge the Committee to at least except leasing transactions
subject to the special rules discussed in the JCT Staff Study from the ambit of any
broad-based definition of ‘‘tax shelter.’’
We believe many of the ‘‘products’’ being marketed today would disappear from
the marketplace if the Treasury Department would promulgate implementing regu-
lations for the confidential arrangement tax shelter registration provisions of section
6111(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. If ‘‘products’’ are re-
quired to be registered with the Internal Revenue Service and taxpayers utilizing
products are obligated to disclose they are utilizing products, identified by a tax
shelter registration number assigned by the Internal Revenue Service, many of the
objectives of the several proposals of the Joint Committee Staff and the Treasury
Department could be accomplished quickly and effectively, without the necessity of
additional litigation.
Registration and identification would eliminate any impact of confidentiality un-
dertakings on the tax system. Registration, promoter recordkeeping, and taxpayer
reporting should also make it relatively easy for the Internal Revenue Service to de-
termine the taxpayers who have employed a particular product and protect the stat-
ute of limitations while examining and evaluating that product. To the extent such
‘‘products,’’ like vampires, vaporize when exposed to the light of day, registration
and identification would have a positive impact on tax administration.
We do not know why the Treasury Department has failed to promulgate the regu-
lations necessary to effectuate and activate section 6111(d). However, to the extent
the delay of approximately two years is attributable to Treasury’s inability to de-
velop a definition of ‘‘tax shelter,’’ it should alert the Congress of the dangers and
difficulties inherent in endeavoring to develop a legislative definition of ‘‘tax shelter’’
that does not chill bona fide business transactions that possess some features that
are common with the ‘‘products’’ marketed under confidentiality covenants running
in favor of the promoter.
On balance, we do not believe major, new legislation of the type suggested by the
Joint Committee Staff and the Treasury Department is necessary or desirable to
deal with the ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ problem. To the extent that implementation
of the registration provisions does not materially inhibit the mass marketing of abu-
sive ‘‘products,’’ the Internal Revenue Service and the courts have employed existing
legal tools to impose tax liability and penalty liability on corporations employing
‘‘products’’ in an effort to reduce their federal income tax liability.
The JCT Staff Study enumerates the judicial doctrines, including sham trans-
action, step transaction, substance over form, economic substance, and business pur-
pose that have been a part of the fabric of tax law for more than 60 years in some
cases. They have survived and thrived, without legislative definition or delineation,
and shown themselves to be sufficiently flexible to permit ready adaptation to ad-
dress the particular abusive transaction currently in vogue. We are concerned that
any effort to define and incorporate those judicial doctrines into the Internal Rev-
enue Code would destroy their flexibility and inhibit their future utility. Thus, while
we encourage the Committee, the Congress, and the Treasury Department to reaf-
firm the continuing viability of these doctrines and their application to transactions,
we respectfully urge that you refrain from trying to define them by legislation.
Our concern that legislating these doctrines would be counterproductive is pre-
mised in part on our perception of the effect of excessive delineation of objective
standards or criteria in the Internal Revenue Code. When Congress enacts a tax
statute with extreme specificity, some taxpayers and tax professionals are encour-
aged to believe that any variant that is completely within a beneficial provision is
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00167 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
164
5Compaq ComputerCorporation v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No 17 (September 21, 1999); IES
Industries, Inc. v. U.S., No. 97–206 (DCND IA, September 22, 1999)
6United Parcel Service of America v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 1999–26528 (August 9, 1999).
7Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc. v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 21 (October 19, 1999).
8 See, United Parcel Service of North America, and Compaq Computer Corporation, supra.
permitted, without regard to whether it has substance or business purpose, or con-
versely, that any transaction that does not fall entirely within a statutory prohibi-
tion’s explicit terms is permitted. Neither of those views is completely accurate, but
they are the seeds of much of the ‘‘product’’ presently being marketed to taxpayers.
Thus, we urge the Committee to permit the judicially-developed doctrines to remain
a part of the common law, rather than endeavoring to explicitly define and incor-
porate them into the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The successes of the IRS in the courts, subsequent to the issuance of the JCT
Staff study and the Treasury White Paper, in employing the judicial doctrines to
address transactions clearly establishes the viability of the doctrines in their
present form and their utility to the IRS to cover a broad range of transactions from
foreign tax credit capture transactions 5 and foreign captive insurance 6 to corporate
owned life insurance.7 These recent successes, including the imposition of penalties
in the United Parcel Service and Compaq Computer cases, demonstrate that the
present system does work and is effective. To be sure, it takes time and effort. How-
ever, that expenditure of time and effort helps assure that the IRS is seeking the
right answer, rather than crying ‘‘tax shelter’’ and pursuing a properly motivated
transaction that has been implemented in a way that minimizes tax liability. Also,
that time and effort was more than justified by the amounts in issue and the impact
those decisions are already having in the ‘‘product’’ marketplace.
As the JCT Staff Study and the Treasury White Paper observe, ‘‘products’’ are fre-
quently marketed under contracts in which the promoter endeavors to limit liability
to the customer in the event the product is unsuccessful and seeks compensation
from the customer if the customer breaches confidentiality or third parties proceed
against the promoter. Now that the IRS has successfully asserted penalties in litiga-
tion,8 larger customers are refusing to provide promoters with those limitation and
indemnity agreements and are demanding stronger warranties from the promoters.
If this trend continues, over time the more tenuous ‘‘products’’ will either be driven
from the marketplace or move to smaller customers with less bargaining power or
sophistication. In the latter event, disclosure will become more important to tax ad-
ministration.
The JCT Staff Study and the Treasury White Paper adopt the approach that dis-
closure of tax return positions is desirable for tax administration but should only
provide mitigation against an enhanced penalty, rather than protection against im-
position of an accuracy-related or substantial authority penalty in tax shelters. The
premise for disclosure is to assist the IRS in identifying shelter products and the
taxpayers who have employed them. Both the Study and the White Paper comment
that the IRS has difficulty identifying tax shelter transactions in corporate audits.
If that is true, then disclosure seemingly would help the IRS. However, to induce
a taxpayer to disclose a position that potentially would not be located by the IRS
in the absence of disclosure requires something more than the difference between
a 20% penalty and a 40% penalty.
The Study and the White Paper do not fully appreciate the significance of any
penalty to a corporate tax professional. Imposition of a penalty based on action or
inaction is frequently grounds for immediate termination and loss of employee bene-
fits, such as unexercised stock options. Thus, to motivate a corporate employee in
such a position to disclose, disclosure must afford per se exemption from an accu-
racy-related or substantial authority penalty as long as the return position meets
a standard that is slightly lower than the threshold standard for imposition of a
penalty without disclosure. In other words, disclosure and a lower standard, provide
sufficient meaningful reward to induce disclosure. If, as under present law, disclo-
sure is effective to provide protection against a penalty only if the return position
satisfies the standard necessary to avoid imposition of a penalty on an undisclosed
transaction, disclosure not likely if imposition of any penalty is a career-ending
event. The corporate employee is going to play the audit lottery, rather than disclose
and risk a penalty—whether at a 1% or 40% rate.
We also recognize the role that ‘‘tax opinions’’ are playing in the corporate tax
shelter product marketing process. The only difference we discern from that role and
the role similar ‘‘opinions’’ played in the individual tax shelter craze of the late
1970’s and early 1980’s is the number of taxpayers to whom any single ‘‘opinion’’
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00168 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
165
9We understand some vendors of ‘‘product’’ deliberately limit the number of taxpayers to
whom a particular ‘‘product’’ will be offered.
10ABA Standing Committee on Professional Responsibility (January 29, 1982).
11 The Treasury Department Regulations Governing the Practice of Attorneys, Certified Public
Accountants, Enrolled Agents, Enrolled Actuaries, and Appraisers before the Internal Revenue
Service, codified at 31 CFR Subtitle A, Part 10, and reprinted as Treasury Department Circular
230 (hereinafter referred to as ‘‘Circular 230’’).
12 ‘‘The lawyer should relate the law to the actual facts to the extent the facts are ascertain-
able. The lawyer should not issue an opinion which a discusses purely hypothetical facts.’’ ABA
Formal Opinion 346 (Revised) (January 29, 1982).
13Codified at 5 USC §301.
14Circular 230, section 10.32, provides, ‘‘Nothing in the regulations in this part shall be con-
strued as authorizing persons not members of the bar to practice law.’’ Note in this regard that
the Notice of Final Rulemaking that announced promulgation of section 10.33 specifically noted
that the promulgation of section 10.33 did not represent a conclusion that the issuance of a
‘‘legal opinion’’ by an authorized practitioner other than an attorney engaged in the private prac-
tice of law was permissible.
15Sperry v. Florida, 373 U.S. 379 (1953). See also, Salch, Inter-professional Practice Issues:
A Debate and Discussion, The ‘‘Practice of Tax,’’ 50 Major Tax Plan. 5–500, 5–506 (Matthew
Bender 1998).
is presented.9 From a professional perspective the obligations of an attorney to his
or her client should not change based on the number of clients to whom the attor-
ney’s opinion is ultimately addressed. Indeed, in our experience, many law firms
have applied the thrust of ABA Formal Opinion 346 (Revised) 10 in all their tax law
opinions to their clients—not merely those that fit the definition of ‘‘tax shelter’’ set
forth in that Opinion. However, we are aware that not all law firms or lawyers
share our views or adhere to this principle as a ‘‘best practice.’’ Thus, we support
modification of Circular 230 11 to clarify that the due diligence precepts and pre-
clusion of hypothetical fact predicate principles of ABA Formal Opinion 346 (Re-
vised) 12 extend to all tax opinions rendered by those entitled to practice before the
IRS.
Since the Agency Practice Act of 1965 13 entitles every individual licensed and in
good standing under local law as an attorney or a certified public accountant to
practice before the IRS, the suggested changes to Circular 230, like the 1986 amend-
ment adopting section 10.33, can be adopted as a principle of reputable conduct and
due diligence by every lawyer and CPA, without regard to whether that lawyer or
CPA actually practices before the IRS or the ‘‘opinion’’ itself is ‘‘practice before the
IRS,’’ within the meaning of section 10.2 of Circular 230, and without regard to
whether the ‘‘opinion’’ is one which the CPA is legally authorized to issue under the
law of the State which has issued his or her CPA license.14
At present a practitioner can be suspended from practice before the IRS by reason
of a felony conviction for robbery. That does not, however, require a finding that the
act of robbery is ‘‘practice before the IRS,’’ within the meaning of Circular 230.
Under the same rationale, an individual can be suspended from practice before the
IRS by reason of issuance of an improper ‘‘tax shelter opinion’’ without necessity of
a finding that the rendition of the opinion is ‘‘practice before the IRS.’’
In certain respects, Circular 230 preempts State law.15 We believe preservation
of State law and judicial remedies are important when professional conduct is the
issue in order to protect the rights of taxpayers and the shareholders of corporate
taxpayers. Their right to pursue State law malpractice or derivative actions against
promoters of ‘‘abusive tax shelters’’ who employ inappropriate ‘‘tax opinions’’ should
not be preempted. Indeed, since the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct con-
tain specific limitations on the ability of lawyers to ethically seek advance agree-
ments limiting malpractice liability to their client, yet the AICPA Code of Profes-
sional Responsibility does not, it appears proper to amend Circular 230 to provide
that it is disreputable for an individual eligible to practice before the IRS to seek
to limit his or her malpractice liability to any client as to any matter that relates
to federal taxation in advance of either performing the service or the assertion by
the client of the claim to which the attempted limitation would be applicable. To
the extent that a lawyer, CPA, or enrolled agent presently is promoting ‘‘products’’
and employing such limitations, this modification of Circular 230 would curtail that
practice.
Since our role generally is that of advising our clients regarding ‘‘products’’ pro-
moted by others, including advising our clients not to participate, we appreciate the
acknowledgement by the Treasury Department in the Treasury Report that its pro-
posal to impose an excise tax on the fees charged by professionals advising their cli-
ents regarding ‘‘tax shelters’’ would not apply to fees charged by a professional ad-
vising a client not to participate in a ‘‘tax shelter.’’ However, we are concerned that
an excise tax liability dependent on the tenor of the legal advice rendered could
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00169 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
166
1Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation, 106th Cong., 1st Sess., Study of Present-Law Pen-
alty and Interest Provisions As Required by Section 3801 of the Internal Revenue Service Restruc-
turing and Reform Act of 1998 (Including Provisions Relating to Corporate Tax Shelters) JCS–
3–99 (July 22, 1999).
2 P.L. 105–206 (July 22, 1998).
3See United States Treasury Department, General Explanations of the Administration’s Rev-
enue Proposals (February 1999).
4 In H.R. 2255, 106th Cong., 1st Sess. (1999), Rep. Doggett (for himself and Reps. Stark, Hin-
chey, Tierney, Allen, Luther, Bonior and Farr), introduced a proposal to disallow tax benefits
claimed to arise from transactions without substantial economic substance (the ‘‘Doggett Bill’’).
5 Section 3801 of the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 required both the Joint Com-
mittee and the Treasury Department to make recommendations to simplify penalty or interest
administration and reduce taxpayer burden.
present a conflict of interest between the advisor and the client that would neces-
sitate disclosure and waiver of the conflict by the client.
We appreciate the opportunity to submit these comments. The principal drafters
of these comments were Steven C. Salch (713–651–5433) in our Houston office and
Stephen L. Millman (212–318–3039) in our New York office. Please contact either
of them if you or your staffs have questions about any of our comments.
Statement of Washington Counsel, P.C., on behalf of Tax Fairness Coalition
COMMENTS ON CORPORATE TAX SHELTER RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE STAFF OF
THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON TAXATION IN ITS PENALTY AND INTEREST STUDY 1
This paper sets forth comments on the ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ and certain other
penalty recommendations made by the staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation
(‘‘JCT’’ or ‘‘Joint Committee’’) in its penalty and interest study that was recently
submitted to the House Committee on Ways and Means and the Senate Committee
on Finance as required by the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform
Act of 1998 (the ‘‘JCT Study’’).2
I. INTRODUCTION
We commend the JCT for its rejection of proposals made by the Administration 3
and others 4 to (i) give the Executive Branch and IRS agents unfettered discretion
to rewrite substantive tax rules or (ii) impose explicit tax increases on other parties
that participate in, and benefit from, transactions covered by their recommendations
(e.g., levies on tax-indifferent parties, disallowed deductions for ordinary and nec-
essary business expenses, and excise taxes on fees paid to third parties or routine
indemnification arrangements). We agree that such proposals have no place in the
current debate. We particularly commend their discussion regarding the importance
of a ‘‘rules based’’ system of taxation.
According to the JCT Study, its recommendations are intended to address both
current and future corporate tax shelter transactions using a balanced approach
that does not interfere with legitimate tax planning activities and does not result
in increased complexity or unfair penalties. We embrace this objective as a funda-
mental requirement of any response to corporate tax shelters. Not only does such
an objective adhere to the spirit of the legislation which called for the JCT Study,5
but it will be essential to ensure the success of any legislative changes in their prac-
tical application. As detailed below, however, we believe that the JCT’s rec-
ommendations would benefit from further analysis.
The JCT Study proposals are sweeping; they would create a new and enhanced
web of rules that would have a significant effect on taxpayers and tax administra-
tion. If enacted, the JCT’s recommendations would fundamentally change the nature
of tax compliance. We are concerned that, while thoughtful and well-intended, the
JCT Study proposals could, in practice, do more harm than good. In particular, we
are concerned that the JCT Study proposals would:
• have the practical effect of creating a strict liability penalty regime that would
apply to legitimate tax planning and routine business transactions and would pro-
vide IRS agents with new weapons to extract inappropriate concessions from tax-
payers;
• penalize tax advisors and return preparers on more than one hundred percent
of their income when their advice turns out to be wrong;
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00170 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
167
6Department of the Treasury, The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion, Analysis
and Legislative Proposals (July 1999).
7As described below, a number of the proposals addressing corporate tax shelters are embed-
ded in the JCT Study’s recommendations regarding other penalty provisions.
8Unless otherwise indicated, all Section references are to Sections of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended (the ‘‘Code’’).
9 In this regard, for reasons that will become clear, it is worth noting that the IRS has taken
the position that mistakes of fact (e.g., an overlooked or misunderstood transaction or document)
can never have substantial authority.
• have the practical effect of discouraging legitimate tax planning and routine
business transactions while forcing more and more taxpayers into refund litigation;
and
• add another layer of mind-numbing complexity to the Internal Revenue Code.
Moreover, the Congress will find it difficult to reclaim any power that it delegates
to the Executive Branch because any attempts to reverse such actions would be
scored as revenue losers under current revenue estimating conventions. For these
reasons, the Congress should not enact the JCT Study proposals, or other similar
legislation at this time. Rather, the Congress should continue to monitor the situa-
tion and instruct the IRS and Treasury to make use of the tools already at their
disposal.
This paper briefly describes the corporate tax shelter recommendations set forth
in the JCT Study. The paper then outlines a general framework for addressing cor-
porate tax shelters. Next, the paper provides specific critiques of certain of the cor-
porate tax shelter recommendations made by the JCT. Although not addressed in
detail in this paper, many of the comments made herein with respect to the rec-
ommendations set forth in the JCT Study, particularly the general framework for
addressing corporate tax shelters, are equally applicable to the proposals made by
the Treasury Department in its recently released white paper on corporate tax shel-
ters (the ‘‘White Paper’’).6
II. OVERVIEW OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE’S PROPOSALS
The JCT Study recommends an expansive definition of corporate tax shelters that
covers a broad range of routine business transactions and ordinary tax planning ac-
tivities (hereinafter sometimes referred to as ‘‘Covered Transactions’’). It also rec-
ommends greatly expanding the scope of penalties that may be imposed on tax-
payers and third parties through proposals that are extremely complex. The JCT’s
corporate tax shelter recommendations generally fall into three categories: (i) pro-
posals targeted at corporations that participate in corporate tax shelters; (ii) pro-
posals targeted at other parties involved in corporate tax shelters; and (iii) proposals
relating to disclosure and registration requirements. Following is a brief overview
of these proposals.7
A. PROPOSALS TARGETED AT CORPORATE TAXPAYERS
The JCT Study recommends fundamental changes in the corporate tax shelter
provisions of the Section 6662 substantial understatement penalty.8 Under current
law, Section 6662 imposes a penalty for a substantial understatement of income tax
in cases involving tax shelters. For purposes of this rule, Section 6662(d)(2)(C)(iii)
defines the term ‘‘tax shelter’’ as:
A partnership or other entity, any investment plan or arrangement, or any
other plan or arrangement, if a significant purpose of such partnership, en-
tity, plan, or arrangement is the avoidance or evasion of Federal income
tax.
If the understatement exceeds certain thresholds, then the taxpayer is subject to
a twenty percent penalty unless the taxpayer has substantial authority for the posi-
tion it is taking and reasonably believes that it is more likely than not to prevail
on the merits if challenged by the IRS.9
The JCT Study recommends: (i) modifying the ‘‘tax shelter’’ definition; (ii) elimi-
nating the requirement that an understatement be ‘‘substantial’’ before a penalty is
imposed; (iii) creating a two-tier (i.e., forty percent/twenty percent) penalty rate; (iv)
mandating imposition of the penalty unless the taxpayer prevails in court; and (v)
repealing the substantial authority/reasonable cause exception unless the taxpayer
satisfies certain disclosure requirements and is able to establish that it had (A) a
greater than seventy-five percent certainty of prevailing in litigation and (B) a mate-
rial non-tax business purpose for the transaction.
1. Modification of ‘‘Tax Shelter’’ Definition
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00171 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
168
The JCT Study would automatically treat a transaction as a tax shelter if it is
described by one or more of the following five indicators (the ‘‘Tax Shelter Indica-
tors’’):
• The reasonably expected pre-tax profits from the arrangement are insignificant
relative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits.
• The arrangement involves a tax-indifferent participant, and the arrangement
(a) results in taxable income materially in excess of economic income to the tax-in-
different participant, (b) permits a corporate participant to characterize items of in-
come, gain, loss, deductions, or credits in a more favorable manner than it otherwise
could without the involvement of the tax-indifferent participant, or (c) results in a
non-economic increase, creation, multiplication, or shifting of basis for the benefit
of the corporate participant, and results in the recognition of income or gain that
is not subject to Federal income tax because the tax consequences are borne by the
tax-indifferent participant.
• The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are significant,
and the arrangement involves a tax indemnity or similar agreement for the benefit
of the corporate participant other than a customary indemnity agreement in an ac-
quisition or other business transaction entered into with a principal in the trans-
action.
• The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are significant,
and the arrangement is reasonably expected to create a ‘‘permanent difference’’ for
U.S. financial reporting purposes under generally accepted accounting principles.
• The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are significant,
and the arrangement is designed so that the corporate participant incurs little (if
any) additional economic risk as a result of entering into the arrangement.
The list of Tax Shelter Indicators would not be exclusive. Accordingly, even if no
Tax Shelter Indicator is present with respect to a particular transaction, the ‘‘sig-
nificant purpose’’ test nonetheless could be met and an entity, plan or arrangement
could still be a corporate tax shelter (i.e., a Covered Transaction) for purposes of the
penalties imposed under Section 6662.
2. Elimination of Threshold for Imposing the Penalty
Because the JCT Study recommends repeal of the requirement that the under-
statement be ‘‘substantial,’’ any understatement attributable to a Covered Trans-
action would be subject to the penalties imposed under Section 6662.
Creation of a Two-Tier Penalty Rate
The JCT Study recommends increasing the understatement penalty rate under
Section 6662 from twenty percent to forty percent for any understatement that is
attributable to a Covered Transaction. If the IRS decided to challenge the claimed
tax treatment of what it viewed as a Covered Transaction, the IRS would not have
the discretion to waive the understatement penalty in settlement negotiations or
otherwise. As a result, the taxpayer could only avoid imposition of the penalty by
successfully litigating the transaction in court and (if unsuccessful on the merits)
litigating over whether the transaction was a Covered Transaction and the potential
application of the abatement rules described below.
a. The forty percent penalty could be completely abated (i.e., no penalty would
apply) if the corporate taxpayer established that it satisfied the following abatement
requirements: (i) the corporate taxpayer must have analyzed the transaction to de-
termine whether any Tax Shelter Indicators are present; (ii) if one or more Tax
Shelter Indicators exist, the corporate taxpayer must have complied with all disclo-
sure requirements (as described below); (iii) a chief financial officer or other senior
corporate official must have certified that such disclosure is true, complete and accu-
rate; and (iv) at the time the corporate taxpayer entered into the transaction, the
corporate taxpayer must have been ‘‘highly confident’’ that it would prevail on the
merits if the tax treatment for the arrangement was challenged by the IRS.
The JCT Study prescribes two criteria for satisfying the ‘‘highly confident’’ stand-
ard. First, this standard would be satisfied only if a reasonable tax practitioner
would believe there existed, at the time the transaction was entered into, at least
a seventy-five percent likelihood that the tax treatment would be sustained on the
merits based upon the facts and the law that existed at that time. In making this
determination, taxpayers could not take into account the possibility that a return
will not be audited, that an issue will not be raised on audit, or that an issue will
be settled. Taxpayers could rely on third-party opinions to satisfy the ‘‘highly con-
fident’’ standard, but only if such reliance is reasonable, within the meaning of
Treas. Reg. § 1.6664–4(c). Second, a corporate taxpayer would not be treated as
meeting the ‘‘highly confident’’ standard unless it can establish a material purpose
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00172 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
169
10Treas. Reg. § 1.6694–2(b)(1).
11As a practical matter, such penalties would almost always result in levies that exceed one
hundred percent of the preparer’s net after-tax income. For example, if you assume that a pre-
parer’s cost of doing business is thirty percent of gross receipts and that the preparer is subject
to a combined federal and state income tax rate of forty percent, then the preparer’s net after-
tax income on a $10,000 fee would be $4,200. In this example, regardless of whether the fifty
percent or one hundred percent penalty applies, the amount of the penalty will exceed the pre-
parer’s after-tax income. Moreover, regardless of the preparer’s cost of doing business, a one
hundred percent penalty rate will always exceed the preparer’s after-tax income because pen-
alties are not deductible under the Code.
12This penalty applies with respect to both the preparation of tax returns and the presen-
tation of tax returns (i.e., in audits and refund claims). Moreover, no actual understatement of
liability is required for the penalty to apply. Rather, Section 6701 merely requires that the re-
turn preparer know (or have reason to believe) that an understatement would result from the
use of the return as prepared. See, e.g., Kuchen v. Commissioner, 679 F. Supp. 769 (D. Ill. 1988).
germane to its trade or business for the transaction, other than the reduction of
Federal income taxes (a ‘‘Material Non-tax Business Purpose’’).
b. The forty percent penalty could be reduced to twenty percent for a Covered
Transaction: (i) described by a Tax Shelter Indicator if the taxpayer meets the re-
portable transaction disclosure requirements (described below) and meets the sub-
stantial authority threshold; (ii) that is not described by a Tax Shelter Indicator if
the taxpayer meets the current law more likely than not threshold (without any dis-
closure) or (iii) that is not described by a Tax Shelter Indicator if the taxpayer meets
the substantial authority (but not the more likely than not) standard and if the tax-
payer meets the generally applicable disclosure requirements of Section
6662(d)(2)(D).
c. These proposals should be viewed in light of the JCT Study’s general rec-
ommendations with respect to standards for tax return positions applicable to all tax-
payers (individual and corporate). In general, with respect to the twenty percent
substantial understatement penalty of Section 6662, these recommendations would:
(i) raise the threshold for undisclosed return positions from substantial authority to
more likely than not; (ii) raise the threshold for disclosed return positions from rea-
sonable basis to substantial authority and (iii) subject all taxpayers to a twenty per-
cent penalty on understatements if the substantial authority standard is not satis-
fied, without regard to whether the matter is disclosed.
PROPOSALS TARGETED AT OTHER INVOLVED PARTIES
In addition to recommendations with respect to corporate taxpayers that partici-
pate in Covered Transactions, the JCT Study recommends certain penalties and
sanctions with respect to other parties that participate in the creation, implementa-
tion or reporting of a Covered Transaction that results in an understatement pen-
alty for a corporate participant.
1. Return Preparer Penalty
The JCT Study recommends raising the standard of conduct for income tax return
preparers regarding positions on a return that result in an understatement of a tax-
payer’s liability. In general, the penalty would apply unless: (i) the tax return pre-
parer reasonably believed that the more likely than not standard was satisfied (in
which case no disclosure would be required under Section 6662(d)(2)(B)) or (ii) the
substantial authority standard was satisfied and the position was disclosed. In this
regard, the JCT Study would increase the substantial authority standard for pre-
parers from the realistic possibility of success standard (i.e., the ‘‘one-in-three’’
test) 10 to a greater than forty percent likelihood of success. If the substantial au-
thority standard is not satisfied, then the preparer would in all cases be subject to
the preparer penalty (without regard to whether the item had been disclosed).
The JCT Study recommends increasing the first-tier penalty on preparers, under
Section 6694(a), from $250 to the greater of $250 or fifty percent of the preparer’s
fee. In addition, the second-tier penalty on preparers, under Section 6694(b), would
be increased from $1,000 to the greater of $1,000 or one hundred percent of the pre-
parer’s fee.11
It is worth noting that these changes would apply to all tax return preparers, re-
gardless of the type of taxpayer (i.e., individual or corporate) and regardless of
whether any items covered by the tax return relate to corporate tax shelters.
2. Aiding and Abetting Penalty
The JCT Study recommends several modifications to the existing penalty under
Section 6701 for aiding and abetting the understatement of tax liability.12 First, the
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00173 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
170
13As discussed supra, in footnote 11, such penalties would almost always result in levies that
exceed one hundred percent of the third party’s net after-tax income.
14 Id.
15Compare Section 7425 (establishing a confidentiality privilege for certain taxpayer commu-
nications).
amount of the penalty would be increased from $10,000 to the greater of $100,000
or one-half the fees related to the transaction received by the person penalized.13
Second, the scope of the penalty would be expanded to apply to any person who
aids or assists in, procures, or advises with respect to the creation, implementation
or reporting of a Covered Transaction that results in an understatement of tax li-
ability of a corporate participant if: (i) the person to be penalized knew, or had rea-
son to believe, that the Covered Transaction (or any portion thereof) could result
in an understatement of tax liability of the corporate participant; (ii) the person
opined, advised, represented or otherwise indicated (whether express or implied)
that, with respect to the tax treatment of the Covered Transaction (or any portion
thereof), the highly confident standard would be satisfied; and (iii) a reasonable tax
practitioner would not have believed that, with respect to the tax treatment of the
Covered Transaction (or any portion thereof), the highly confident standard would
be satisfied.
The latter requirement appears to establish a standard for tax return preparers
that is different than that recommended by the JCT Study for taxpayers. The dif-
ference, which is so subtle that it might be unintentional, is that a tax return pre-
parer would be liable for the penalty if a reasonable tax practitioner would not have
believed that the highly confident standard would be satisfied, whereas a taxpayer
would not be liable for the substantial understatement penalty if a reasonable tax
practitioner would have believed that the highly confident standard would be satis-
fied. Thus, a taxpayer need find only one reasonable tax practitioner to agree that
it meets the standard, while a tax return preparer needs to ensure that every rea-
sonable tax practitioner agrees that it meets the standard.
The IRS would be required to publish the names of all persons who have been
penalized under this provision. In addition, such persons would be automatically re-
ferred to the IRS Director of Practice and the appropriate state licensing authority
for possible disciplinary sanctions.
3. Enjoining Promoters
The JCT Study recommends modifying the authority of Federal district courts
under Section 7408 to enjoin promoters of Covered Transactions or the aiding and
abetting of the understatement of tax liability. Section 7408 would be amended to
provide that the traditional equity factors such as irreparable injury and likelihood
of success on the merits need not be considered once the government has satisfied
the statutory requirements (i.e., that the promoter has engaged in conduct subject
to penalty under Sections 6700 or 6701 and that injunctive relief is appropriate to
prevent a recurrence of such conduct).
4. Regulation of Professional Conduct of Practice
The JCT Study recommends that explicit statutory authorization for Treasury
Circular 230 (relating to regulation of practice before the IRS) be provided in the
Code, including authorization for the imposition of monetary sanctions not to exceed
one hundred percent of the aggregate fees associated with the sanctioned conduct.14
In addition, the JCT Study recommends numerous modifications to Circular 230,
which generally are intended to reflect the other recommendations made in the JCT
Study. Perhaps most noteworthy is that the rendering of tax advice in connection
with a Covered Transaction would be treated as practice before the IRS without re-
gard to whether the advisor was a return preparer with respect to that matter. Pre-
sumably, the IRS would be entitled to access to that advice for purposes of deter-
mining whether the provisions of Circular 230 were implicated.15
C. DISCLOSURE AND REGISTRATION PROPOSALS
The JCT Study includes specific proposals requiring disclosure by corporate tax-
payers that participate in Covered Transactions and registration of such trans-
actions, either by the promoter thereof or corporate taxpayers that participate in the
transaction.
1. Participant Disclosure
The JCT Study would require any corporate taxpayer that participates in any
transaction which is described by one or more of the Tax Shelter Indicators (a ‘‘Re-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00174 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
171
portable Transaction’’) to disclose its participation in such transaction within thirty
days after the close of the transaction (‘‘30-day Disclosure’’) and again on the tax-
payer’s Federal income tax return (‘‘Tax Return Disclosure’’). As indicated above,
satisfaction of these disclosure requirements would be a prerequisite to partial or
complete abatement of the penalties that apply to corporate taxpayers in connection
with Reportable Transactions. Moreover, because the JCT Study would define a
‘‘corporate participant’’ as any domestic corporation with average annual gross re-
ceipts in excess of $5 million, it appears that this disclosure may be required of any
corporate taxpayer that participates in the transaction, even if the taxpayer does
not obtain any tax benefits from the transaction (e.g., any bank that provides financ-
ing in connection with a Reportable Transaction would be required to comply with
these disclosure requirements).
a. The 30-day Disclosure requirement would apply to any Reportable Transaction
in which the reasonably expected net tax benefits equal or exceed $1 million. Cor-
porate taxpayers participating in such transactions would be required to disclose:
(i) the relevant facts and assumptions with respect to the transaction; (ii) the rea-
sonably expected net tax benefits arising from the transaction; (iii) which Tax Shel-
ter Indicators describe the transaction; (iv) a summary of the taxpayer’s rationale
and analysis underlying the tax treatment of the transaction, including the sub-
stantive authority relied on to support such treatment; (v) the taxpayer’s Material
Non-tax Business Purpose for the transaction; and (vi) the existence of any ex-
pressed or implied fee arrangement with a third party which is contingent upon or
is otherwise to be determined based upon the tax consequences of the transaction.
The chief financial officer or another senior corporate officer with knowledge of the
facts would be required to certify, under penalties of perjury, that the disclosure
statement is true, accurate and complete.
b. The Tax Return Disclosure requirement also would apply to all Reportable
Transactions regardless of the dollar amounts involved. This requirement would be
satisfied by attaching a copy of any required 30-day Disclosure, together with disclo-
sure of any material changes in law or facts since the time of entering into the
transaction, and identifying which Tax Shelter Indicators describe the transaction.
c. Although described by one or more Tax Shelter Indicators, certain transactions
would be exempt from the disclosure requirements outlined above. First, to the extent
provided by regulations, transactions and arrangements that are properly reported
on certain forms specifically prescribed for arrangements of that type would not be
treated as Reportable Transactions. In this regard, the JCT Study suggests that
such regulations would provide exemptions from both the 30-day Disclosure and Tax
Return Disclosure requirements for taxpayers that file Form 1120–FSC (with re-
spect to foreign sales corporations), Form 1120–DISC (with respect to domestic
international sales corporations), Form 8586 (with respect to the low income housing
credit), Form 1120, schedule K, line 12 (with respect to tax exempt interest), and
Form 8860 (with respect to the qualified zone academy bond credit). Second, an ex-
ception to the 30-day Disclosure requirement—but not Tax Return Disclosure—
would be automatically provided (regardless of regulations) with respect to any leas-
ing transaction within the scope of Rev. Proc. 75–21, 1975–1 C.B. 715, to the extent
that the guidelines set forth in that revenue procedure, or the relevant case law
thereunder, are satisfied.
d. Covered Transactions that are not Reportable Transactions would be subject to
a different set of disclosure requirements. The JCT Study recommends that any posi-
tion taken or advised to be taken on a tax return (including with respect to Covered
Transactions that are not Reportable Transactions) must be disclosed unless the re-
ported tax treatment is more likely than not the correct tax treatment under the
Code.
e. Finally, the JCT Study would require any corporate taxpayer that is required
to pay an understatement penalty of at least $1 million attributable to a corporate
tax shelter to disclose that fact to its shareholders. Such disclosure would be required
to indicate both the amount of the penalty and the factual setting under which the
penalty was imposed.
2. Tax Shelter Registration
The JCT Study also recommends modifying the rules with respect to registration
of corporate tax shelters. Under current law, Section 6111 requires any tax shelter
organizer to register the tax shelter with the IRS not later than the first day on
which the first offering for interests in the tax shelter occurs. Congress enacted Sec-
tion 6707 to impose a penalty for the failure to timely register tax shelters under
Section 6111; because the Treasury Department has not yet promulgated the imple-
menting regulations, Section 6707 has not yet taken effect. When those regulations
are promulgated, the penalty under Section 6707 for the failure to timely register
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00175 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
172
16The following table is compiled from data set forth in Office of Management and Budget,
Historical Tables, Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2000 (February 1999).
a tax shelter will be equal to the greater of (i) fifty percent of the fees paid all pro-
moters of the tax shelter with respect to offerings made before the date the tax shel-
ter is registered or (ii) $10,000. If the promoter does not register and is not a U.S.
person, then any potential participant in the tax shelter must register within ninety
days unless it notifies the promoter that it will not participate.
a. The current standard under Section 6111(d)(1) for triggering the tax shelter reg-
istration requirements is that the tax shelter involve any entity, plan, arrangement
or transaction: (i) where a significant purpose of the structure is the avoidance or
evasion of federal income tax for a direct or indirect corporate participant, (ii) which
is offered to any potential participant under conditions of confidentiality and (iii) for
which the tax shelter promoters may receive fees in excess of $100,000 in the aggre-
gate.
b. The JCT Study recommends modifying this standard in two respects. First, the
requirement that an arrangement be offered under conditions of confidentiality
would be replaced with a requirement that the arrangement (or the tax analysis un-
derlying the arrangement) is reasonably expected to be presented to more than one
potential participant. Second, the threshold for promoter fees would be increased
from $100,000 to $1 million in aggregate fees expected to be received from the spe-
cific arrangement and all similar arrangements.
Because the first criteria set forth in Section 6111(d)(1) corresponds to the cor-
porate tax shelter definition provided in Section 6662 (i.e., that a significant purpose
of the structure or arrangement be the avoidance or evasion of federal income tax
for a direct or indirect corporate participant), it appears that the tax shelter reg-
istration requirements will apply to all Covered Transactions (including, but not
limited to, Reportable Transactions).
c. In the case of arrangements that are described by one or more Tax Shelter Indi-
cators (i.e., Reportable Transactions), the JCT Study would require additional infor-
mation to be disclosed as part of the registration process. This would include a de-
scription of (i) the claimed tax treatment of the arrangement and a summary of the
authorities for the positions taken; (ii) the calculations for the arrangement under
a reasonable set of hypothetical facts (including any calculations used to determine
that the arrangement is described by a Tax Shelter Indicator); and (iii) the reasons
why the arrangement is reasonably expected to be considered a tax shelter because
of the presence of one or more Tax Shelter Indicators.
GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ADDRESSING CORPORATE TAX SHELTERS
We believe that an appropriate framework for addressing corporate tax shelters
requires an evaluation of the true scope of the perceived problem; the ability of the
Treasury Department and the IRS to identify imperfections in our tax system
through the tools it already has at its disposal; and the ability of the government
to address the problems that it does identify, either through the rulemaking process
or through the courts. Only when the Treasury Department and the IRS do not
have the necessary tools to address the problems they identify, or when the Treas-
ury Department identifies problems that it cannot address through its existing regu-
latory authority, should the Congress provide additional tools and delegations of au-
thority to the Treasury Department and the IRS. To the extent that the Congress
determines that such additional tools or delegations are necessary, we agree with
the JCT’s conclusions that such tools or delegations should not interfere with legiti-
mate tax planning or impose needless complexity, and would also suggest that such
tools should not result in arbitrary or hidden tax increases or violate basic notions
of fairness and equity.
A. THE FIRST STEP OF ANY ANALYSIS SHOULD BE TO ASSESS THE CAUSES AND SE-
VERITY OF THE PROBLEM AND TO ENSURE THAT ANY REMEDY DOES NOT RISK
CAUSING MORE HARM THAN GOOD
The rhetoric and anecdotal press accounts that have surfaced surrounding cor-
porate tax shelters suggest that the corporate tax base is rapidly eroding and in im-
minent danger of imploding. While we understand that the perception of a problem
is itself a problem that may require attention, the data we have reviewed simply
does not support claims that the corporate tax base is at risk.16
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00176 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
173
17CBO, Economic and Budget Outlook, Fiscal Year 2000–2009, January 1999, p. 24.
18 Id. at 27.
19 Id.
Corporate Income Tax Receipts
Year Corporate incometax receipts Total receipts
Percent of
total
Percent of
GDP
FY1989 ..................................... $103,291,000 $991,190,000 10.4 1.9
FY1990 ..................................... $93,507,000 $1,031,969,000 119.1 1.6
FY1991 ..................................... $98,086,000 $1,055,041,000 9.3 1.7
FY1992 ..................................... $100,270,000 $1,097,279,000 9.2 1.6
FY1993 ..................................... $117,520,000 $1,154,401,000 10.2 1.8
FY1994 ..................................... $140,385,000 $1,258,627,000 11.2 2.1
FY1995 ..................................... $157,004,000 $1,351,830,000 11.6 2.2
FY1996 ..................................... $171,824,000 $1,453,062,000 11.8 2.3
FY1997 ..................................... $182,293,000 $1,579,292,000 11.5 2.3
FY1998 ..................................... $188,677,000 $1,721,798,000 11.0 2.2
These statistics indicate that, despite the Administration’s assertions that cor-
porate tax shelters have severely eroded the corporate tax base, corporate taxpayers
in the United States have paid more money to the Federal government for each of
the past nine years, and that the percentage of corporate income tax receipts as
compared to both total Federal receipts and gross domestic product has remained
steady over the past decade. Moreover, the Administration’s estimates for the next
five years indicate that this trend will continue, with corporate income taxes as a
percentage of gross domestic product remaining at approximately 2.1 percent for
each of those years and annual corporate payments continuing to trend up. Indeed,
the Administration’s own revenue estimates suggest that the scope of the corporate
tax shelter problem is limited. The Administration estimates that its six generic tax
shelter proposals would increase revenues by $1.76 billion over five years—less than
0.2% of total projected corporate tax receipts over that period. Of this amount, $830
million relates to the proposal to tax income attributable to tax indifferent parties.
One of the reasons cited by government agencies and officials for surpluses higher
than expected over the past couple years, and in the future, is a stronger than ex-
pected economy resulting in higher than expected corporate profits and unparalleled
job growth, which in turn result in higher than expected tax revenue. Domestic
businesses have become more efficient in their business operations and have been
able to employ more workers and raise capital to effectively compete in the global
market place.
The Congressional Budget Office (‘‘CBO’’) notes that ‘‘corporate profits are begin-
ning to be squeezed by higher labor costs and the inability of firms to raise prices
in the face of strong opposition from home and abroad.’’ 17
CBO also notes that corporate profits will decline primarily because of a projected
increase in gross domestic product devoted to depreciation.18
CBO predicts that some decline in corporate profits from recent levels is ‘‘inevi-
table’’ because of the sensitivity of corporate profits to business-cycle fluctuations.19
In an era of projected budget surpluses, the size of which is due in part to in-
creased employment and corporate profits (and taxes thereon), the Congress should
require compelling evidence of the need for enacting proposals that would restrict
the ability of corporate taxpayers to operate efficiently and respond to changing
market conditions. This is especially true when CBO is predicting increased pres-
sures on future corporate profits.
As the JCT Study states, no direct measure of loss in tax revenues attributable
to corporate tax shelters is currently available. But, with corporate profits steadily
increasing, and with corporate income tax receipts likewise accelerating, the burden
should rest on those who are calling for a new and enhanced system to substantiate
their claims of an imploding revenue base. The burden should not be placed on tax-
payers to prove that they should be paying even more income taxes in order to avoid
new penalties. Moreover, as noted above, the Congress should act judiciously in this
area. Due to the current revenue estimating conventions, once the Treasury Depart-
ment and IRS receive new delegations of authority to attack corporate tax shelters,
any attempt to curb that authority would be scored as resulting in a revenue loss.
Accordingly, Congress should not let anecdotal evidence and targeted press ac-
counts attacking various transactions lead to legislation that does more harm than
good. The threshold for enacting legislation in this area remains high. Tax shelters
do not threaten the corporate tax base. Any responses to the problem, when appro-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00177 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
174
20 In the White Paper, Treasury recommended (i) significantly increased disclosure; (ii) a sig-
nificantly harsher penalty structure; (iii) a substantive change in law such as that proposed in
the Doggett Bill; and (iv) additional penalties and excise taxes on promoters, advisors and tax-
indifferent parties that participate in corporate tax shelters.
21See JCT Press Release, 98–2 (December 21, 1998) (emphasis added).
22See Section 1028 of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997(enacting Section 6111(d)).
23See the U.S. Treasury Department’s General Explanations of the Administration’s Revenue
Proposals, at 81 (February 1997). According to Treasury:
Many corporate tax shelters are not registered with the IRS. Requiring registration of cor-
porate tax shelters would result in the IRS receiving useful information at an early date regard-
ing various forms of tax shelter transactions engaged in by corporate participants. This will
allow the IRS to make better informed judgments regarding the audit of corporate tax returns
and to monitor whether legislation or administrative action is necessary regarding the type of
transactions being registered.
24 Section 6111 was added to the Code in the Tax Reform Act of 1984. In 1989, the Commis-
sioner’s task force Report on Civil Tax Penalties concluded that ‘‘[v]irtually no empirical data
exists’’ about the Section 6111 penalty (VI–22 and n. 29 (1989)).
25Commentators view the rules enacted in 1997 as quite expansive. See, Mark Ely and Evelyn
Elgin, New Tax Shelter Penalties Target Most Tax Planning, Tax Notes (December 8, 1997);
Sheryl Stratton, Restructuring Agreement would Expose Tax Shelter Opinions, Tax Notes (June
23, 1998).
priately articulated, should not impose complex and overreaching rules that under-
mine the ability of domestic businesses to operate efficiently, and thereby under-
mine the job creation and corporate profits that ultimately generate the long-term
growth of Federal revenues.
B. TREASURY HAS SEVERAL EXISTING TOOLS TO COMBAT CORPORATE TAX SHELTERS
WHICH SHOULD BE EVALUATED BEFORE PILING ON NEW ONES
Much of the rhetoric relating to the ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ issue suggests that the
government needs new tools because it is not aware of transactions and tax plan-
ning arrangements which it might deem inappropriate. That is why the Administra-
tion proposed numerous specific provisions to attack transactions that it does not
like, plus the general provisions, such as that proposed in the Doggett Bill, in case
there are others which they have not yet found.20 The JCT Study, like the White
Paper, appears to embrace the notion that new tools are required even before under-
taking a thorough analysis of the existing powers that the Administration has at
its disposal.
The IRS has several existing and some new tools at its disposal to identify cor-
porate tax shelters. Before enacting new proposals, existing rules and authorities
should be carefully and thoroughly reviewed. If they do not work or are inadequate
perhaps they should be repealed and replaced with new ones. Adding another layer
of penalties and rules to overlay existing ones merely creates more complexity and
potential pitfalls for taxpayers. It is contrary to the intent of Congress in mandating
the JCT Study and requiring a review of the ‘‘administration and implementation
by the Internal Revenue Service of interest and penalty provisions of the [Code] and
to make any legislative or administrative recommendations the JCT deems appro-
priate to simplify penalty or interest administration and to reduce taxpayer bur-
den.’’ 21
As recently as 1997, the Congress enacted a law that expanded the definition of
what qualifies as a ‘‘tax shelter’’ for purposes of registering such transactions with
the IRS.22 When Treasury proposed the registration provision in February 1997, it
explained that the provision would help get the IRS useful information about cor-
porate deals at an early stage to help identify transactions to audit and then take
appropriate action—presumably through enforcement, regulatory changes, and re-
quests for legislation when necessary.23 The filing requirement becomes effective
when Treasury Regulations are prescribed. To date, such regulations have not been
issued. One explanation for the delay may be the concern that the 1997 amendment
is limited to transactions offered under conditions of confidentiality, and that tax-
payers will simply enter into transactions without such conditions in order to avoid
application of the new rules. Nonetheless, there appears to have been little effort
to assess the effectiveness of existing programs,24 as expanded in 1997, or to correct
any perceived flaws in the 1997 amendments, before making wholesale changes to
these rules.25
The expansive definition of tax shelters for purposes of the tax shelter registration
provision was also carried over to Section 6662, the substantial understatement pen-
alty provision. Accordingly, the increased exposure to the substantial understate-
ment penalty, as a result of the 1997 changes, is virtually brand new and has not
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00178 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
175
26As suggested by the staff of the JCT in its description of the Administration’s revenue pro-
posals, ‘‘it may be premature to propose new measures to deal with corporate tax shelters when
provisions have already been enacted that are intended to that, but where there has been no
opportunity to evaluate the effectiveness of those already-enacted provisions because they have
not yet become effective because of the lack of the required guidance.’’ Staff of the JCT, Descrip-
tion of Revenue Provisions Contained in the President’s Fiscal year 2000 Budget Proposal, JCS–
1–99 at 165 (Feb. 22, 1999) (hereinafter the ‘‘JCT Report’’).
27 Treas. Reg. Section 1.6664–(4).
28 Internal Revenue Service Form 1120, Schedule M–1.
29The White Paper and the JCT Study both suggest that the Schedule M–1 is not a useful
audit tool, and that negotiations over audit plans allow taxpayers to hide corporate tax shelter
issues. This is simply not the case. The IRS invariably uses the Schedule M–1 as a road-map
for conducting its audits, and one of the first requests made by the IRS in any audit of a large
corporation is a request for a detailed explanation of book/tax differences.
30GAO, ‘‘Tax Administration—Factors Affecting Results from Large Corporations,’’ p. 1, GAO/
GGD—97–62 (Apr. 1997).
31Despite the assertion made in the JCT Study that ‘‘audits of large corporations typically
follow an agreed-upon agenda of issues that is negotiated by the IRS and the corporate tax-
payer,’’ in practice we have found that the IRS determines which issues will be covered by an
audit, and that the IRS will continue to raise new issues throughout the audit process. Thus,
the notion that corporate taxpayers can ‘‘win the audit lottery’’ by negotiating the initial agenda
for an audit does not reflect the reality of how the IRS conducts audits.
been assessed.26 In this case, unlike the registration requirement discussed above,
there is no requirement that the arrangement involve a corporation, a confiden-
tiality agreement or minimum promoter fees. As a result, it is worth noting, that
under current law a corporate taxpayer can fully disclose a position on a tax return
and can have substantial authority for such position but still be subject to penalty
if the transaction is considered a tax shelter. The only way to avoid a penalty is
to establish reasonable cause under Section 6664(c) which, by regulation, Treasury
has already circumscribed so that for example, a taxpayer’s reasonable belief that
it is more likely than not to prevail may not be sufficient.27
Many have argued that the success of the 1997 changes to the substantial under-
statement penalty rules will turn on how artfully the term ‘‘tax shelter’’ is defined
by the Treasury Department and enforced by IRS agents. There is great concern in
the business community that the expanded definition will provide a strong incentive
for revenue agents to set up penalties as bargaining chips in negotiations. Before
considering giving these agents more authority, it is important to evaluate the effect
of these most recent changes. It is premature to explore new proposals even before
the most recent changes take effect.
Disclosure of appropriate information to the IRS is an important element of suc-
cessful tax enforcement. As indicated above, Congress approved enhanced disclosure
of tax shelters in the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 by adopting provisions that the
IRS and Treasury have not yet implemented. This is on top of existing disclosure
requirements. In this regard, we note that corporate taxpayers generally are re-
quired to reconcile their book and taxable income on the face of the corporate in-
come tax return.28 Thus, corporate taxpayers already are required to disclose (and
must be prepared to explain and justify) the book/tax differences that the Adminis-
tration and the JCT Staff view as a key indicator of potential corporate tax shelter
transactions.29 Moreover, the largest 1,700 corporate taxpayers are included in the
coordinated examination program30 and are subject to continuous audit by revenue
agents who routinely work from offices at the taxpayer’s headquarters and have the
time and access to all of the information necessary to identify potential corporate
tax shelters.31
C. THE IRS REGULARLY IDENTIFIES IMPERFECTIONS IN OUR TAX SYSTEM THROUGH
THE TOOLS IT ALREADY HAS AT ITS DISPOSAL
As a practical matter, when the government does identify what it perceives as
‘‘abuses,’’ the IRS has often been aggressive in challenging those transactions
through examination and litigation.
1. Litigation
Significant cases that the government has won in recent years include: Ford
Motor Co. v. Commissioner, 102 T.C. 87 (1994), aff’d 71 F.3d 209 (6th Cir. 1995)
(Tax Court limited a current deduction for a settlement payment, stating that tax
treatment claimed by the taxpayer would have enabled it to profit from its tort li-
ability); Jacobs Engineering Group, Inc. v. United States, 97–1 USTC 87,755 (CCH
¶ 50,340) (C.D. Cal. 1997), aff’d 99–1 USTC 87,786 (CCH ¶50,335) (9th Cir. 1999)
(applying Section 956 to a transaction despite the fact that a literal reading of the
regulations would not have subjected the taxpayer to that provision); ACM Partner-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00179 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
176
32Treas. Reg. §1.701–2.
33Prop. Treas. Reg. §1.337(d)–3.
34Treas. Reg. §1.881–3; Prop. Treas. Reg. §1.7701(l)–2.
35Temp. Treas. Reg. §1.894–1T.
36Prop. Treas. Reg. §1.7701(l)–3.
37Rev. Rul. 99–14, 1999–13 I.R.B. 3.
38 Prop. Treas. Reg. §1.954–9.
39Prop. Treas. Reg. §1.643(a)–8.
40Notice 89–37, 1989–1 C.B. 679.
41Notice 94–46, 1994–1 C.B. 356.
42Notice 98–5, 1998–3 I.R.B. 49.
43Notice 98–11, 1998–6 I.R.B. 13.
ship v. Commissioner, 73 T.C.M. (CCH) 2189 (1997), aff’d 157 F.3d 231 (3d Cir.
1998) (not respecting a partnership’s purchase and subsequent sale of notes, stating
that the transaction lacked economic substance) cert. denied 119 S. Ct. 1251 (1999);
ASA Investerings Partnership v. Commissioner, 76 T.C.M. (CCH) 325 (1998) (apply-
ing an intent test to determine that a foreign participant in a partnership was a
lender, rather than a partner, for federal income tax purposes); United Parcel Serv-
ice of America, Inc. v. Commissioner, T.C.M. No. 268 (1999) (treating an intragroup
restructuring involving a related insurance company as a sham, stating that the re-
structuring was primarily motivated by tax considerations); The Limited Inc. v.
Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 13 (1999) (holding in favor of the IRS on grounds that
the principal purpose for organizing a foreign subsidiary to purchase certificates of
deposit from a domestic subsidiary, rather than using a domestic corporation, was
to avoid the application of Section 956); Compaq Computer Corp. v. Commissioner,
113 T.C. No. 17 (1999) (holding that the economic substance doctrine applied to
deny foreign tax credits attributable to the purchase and resale of ADRs when the
transaction was (i) designed to yield a specific result and eliminate all economic
risks, (ii) the taxpayer had no reasonable possibility of a pre-tax profit and (iii) the
taxpayer had no non-tax business purpose for the transaction); IES Industries, Inc.
v. United States, No. C97–206 (N.D. Iowa September 22, 1999) (order granting par-
tial summary judgment in favor of IRS under facts similar to Compaq); Winn-Dixie
v. Commissioner, 113 T.C. No. 21 (1999) (holding that a leveraged corporate-owned
life insurance program lacked economic substance and business purpose when the
court found that the only function of the program was to generate interest and fee
deductions in order to offset income from other sources); and Saba Partnership v.
Commissioner, T.C.M. No. 359 (1999) (applying economic substance test to disregard
partnership transactions similar to those addressed in ACM Partnership and ASA
Investorings Partnership).
Of particular note is that in UPS and Compaq the IRS asserted, and the courts
sustained, the imposition of meaningful penalties on the taxpayers. This suggests
that the current law penalty provisions are being used, despite an assertion to the
contrary in the JCT Study.
2. Administrative Action
Likewise, the Administration regularly addresses what it perceives as ‘‘abuses’’
through notices and regulations. In recent years, the Treasury Department has pro-
mulgated a number of regulations and other rules intended to stop tax planning ac-
tivities that the Treasury Department has viewed as inappropriate. These include
the partnership anti-abuse regulations,32 the proposed regulations targeting certain
partnership transactions involving a partner’s stock,33 the anti-conduit financing
regulations,34 the temporary regulations targeting the improper use of tax treaties
by hybrid entities,35 the recently proposed regulations targeting fast-pay stock ar-
rangements,36 the recently released revenue ruling attacking certain leasing trans-
actions,37 the recently proposed regulations targeting certain transactions involving
foreign hybrid entities 38 and the recently proposed regulations targeting certain
charitable remainder trust arrangements.39
Moreover, on a number of occasions in recent years, the Treasury Department has
issued notices to target specific tax planning techniques, typically announcing its in-
tention to issue regulations addressing such techniques that will be effective as of
the date of the notice. Examples of this approach include notices attacking certain
partnership transactions,40 inversion transactions,41 transactions involving the ac-
quisition or generation of foreign tax credits 42 and transactions involving foreign
hybrid entities.43 On several occasions, the regulatory guidance has been issued
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00180 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
177
44See Section 7805(b)(3) (authorizing Treasury to issue regulations retroactively when nec-
essary to prevent abuse, but only with respect to statutory provisions enacted on or after July
30, 1996).
45 In Notice 98–11, the IRS and Treasury announced their intention to propose regulations
targeting certain transactions involving foreign hybrid entities. Less than three months after the
issuance of Notice 98–11, temporary regulations implementing the notice were promulgated. As
a result of a significant legislative backlash to those temporary regulations, which generally fo-
cused on whether the targeted transactions were in fact inappropriate and whether Treasury
had the authority to issue the regulations, the IRS and Treasury issued Notice 98–35, in which
they expressed their intent to revise the temporary regulations with a new effective date. Those
regulations were proposed on July 9, 1999, with a proposed effective date of no earlier than
2006.
with retroactive effective dates, a practice that is likely to have a chilling effect on
transactions that taxpayers believe the government might find ‘‘abusive.’’ 44
3. Targeted Legislation
Under the present system, when the Treasury Department identifies a perceived
‘‘abusive’’ transaction, whether through rulemaking or by way of a specific legisla-
tive proposal, the Congress has not hesitated to enact legislation to curb trans-
actions that it perceives as inappropriate. For example, last year the Congress elimi-
nated certain tax benefits involving the liquidation of a regulated investment com-
pany or real estate investment trust. In addition, just several months ago the Con-
gress enacted a provision to address certain transactions involving the transfer of
property subject to multiple liabilities. While in each case the statute was effective
as of the date of announcement, the Congress made clear (as it does routinely in
perceived abuse cases) that the IRS was free to attack pre-effective date trans-
actions under prior law.
The events that unfolded over the past eighteen months following the release of
Notice 98–11,45 and the Congress’ repeated rejection of most of the Administration’s
proposed revenue raisers, highlight another issue that should be considered in light
of the proposals to provide the IRS and the Treasury Department with new ways
to combat transactions that they view as inappropriate. We respectfully submit that
the new arsenal of weapons recommended by the JCT Study would effectively allow
the IRS and Treasury to accomplish what the Congress has effectively prevented in
the legislative arena. Moreover, even when the Congress and the Treasury Depart-
ment agree that a problem exists, they may not agree on the appropriate solution.
Department agree that a problem exists, they may not agree on the appropriate
solution.
We are not suggesting that there are no transactions that generate unanticipated
and inappropriate tax consequences. To the contrary, these results are the inevi-
table outcome of a tax system that is too complex and burdensome. We also recog-
nize the obvious—taxpayers and their advisors move quickly to take advantage of
perceived tax planning opportunities. Nevertheless, wholesale new laws with vague
and punitive components can do more harm than good.
D. CRITERIA THAT SHOULD BE USED IN EVALUATING LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO
ADDRESS CORPORATE TAX SHELTERS
To the extent that Congress determines that legislative action is required to ad-
dress corporate tax shelters, such action should be commensurate with the problem.
Moreover, Congress should balance carefully the expected benefit of any legislative
proposal with the likely adverse consequences of enacting such a proposal. In par-
ticular, we respectfully suggest that no legislative proposal should be enacted that
would: interfere with mainstream business transactions and ordinary tax planning
activities; impose needless complexity; violate basic notions of fairness and equity
or result in an arbitrary or hidden tax increase.
1. Any Legislative Solution Should Not Interfere with Mainstream Business Trans-
actions and Ordinary Tax Planning Activities
No legislative solution to the perceived corporate tax shelter problem should un-
dermine routine business transactions and tax planning. As Judge Learned Hand
observed over sixty years ago:
A transaction, otherwise within an exception of the tax law, does not lose
its immunity, because it is actuated by a desire to avoid, or, if one choose,
to evade, taxation. Any one may so arrange his affairs that his taxes shall
be as low as possible; he is not bound to choose that pattern which will best
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00181 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
178
46Helvering v. Gregory, 69 F.2d 809, 810 (2nd Cir. 1934), aff’d 293 U.S. 465 (1935).
47Tax Bill Will Include Extenders, Some Shelter Provisions, Archer Says, 1999 TNT 56–1
(March 23, 1999) (quoting Rep. Archer, Chairman of the House Committee on Ways and Means,
to the effect that [Chmn. Archer] ‘‘wants to proceed more cautiously and doesn’t want to injure
taxpayers who are trying to legally reduce their tax liabilities in the push to catch those who
abuse the system’’).
48Finance Committee to Review Tax Code Penalties, Including Corporate Tax Shelter Pro-
posals, News Release from Sen. Roth (July 13, 1999) (‘‘Corporate tax shelters should be curtailed
without affecting legitimate business transactions.’’)
49Hearing on the President’s Fiscal Year 2000 Budget Before the House Committee on Ways
and Means, 106th Cong., 1st Sess. (1999) (statement of Hon. Donald Lubick, Assistant Secretary
(Tax Policy), U.S. Department of the Treasury) (‘‘The Treasury Department does not intend to
affect legitimate business transactions.’’)
50 JCT Study at 219 (stating that the tax system must not impede taxpayers’ ability to conduct
business).
pay the Treasury; there is not even a patriotic duty to increase one’s
taxes.46
All of the tax policy makers in the current debate on corporate tax shelters—in-
cluding the Chairman of the House Committee on Ways and Means,47 the Chairman
of the Senate Committee on Finance,48 the Treasury Department 49 and the
JCT 50—agree that legislation should not inhibit legitimate business transactions
and tax planning activities.
The question that must be answered is whether the proposals contained in the
White Paper and the JCT Study impede legitimate tax planning (i.e., the activities
described by Judge Hand as an integral part of our tax system). For the reasons
set forth below, the answer to this question is yes. It is clear that they would have
precisely the chilling effect that all involved have said they wish to avoid.
2. Any Legislative Solution Should Not Impose Needless Complexity
When discussing our tax system, there is only one complaint that is universally
shared—the system is far too complex and must be simplified. In this regard, it is
important to note that complexity can be both substantive and procedural. Sub-
stantive complexity arises at one extreme when the operative definitions and rules
are crafted so broadly that they cannot be reasonably and uniformly applied; it
arises at the other extreme when taxpayers are required to navigate a labyrinth of
rules in order to determine which substantive rules will apply. Procedural com-
plexity arises when, for example, taxpayers are subject to burdensome reporting or
record-keeping requirements, or must engage in costly and protracted disputes with
the government.
The question that must be answered is whether the proposals contained in the
White Paper and the JCT Study lead to significant substantive procedural com-
plexity. For the reasons set forth below, the answer to this question is yes.
3. Any Legislative Solution Should Not Violate Basic Notions of Fairness and Equity
One of the striking aspects of the proposals to address corporate tax shelters is
the apparent failure to consider standards of basic fairness and equity. These con-
cepts are, of course, difficult to define in practice. However, we believe that the fair-
ness and equity of the proposals under consideration can be addressed by consid-
ering questions such as the following:
• Do the proposals create a structural bias that will cause taxpayers to system-
atically over-pay their taxes?
• Do the proposals give IRS revenue agents the authority to extract inappro-
priate concessions from taxpayers?
• Do the proposals permit the government to avoid accountability for the rules
that it writes?
• Do the proposals impose standards on taxpayers and third parties that are far
more onerous than the standards imposed on the government?
Unfortunately, for the reasons set forth below, the answer to each of these ques-
tions is likely to be yes. As a result, the proposals under consideration do violate
basic notions of fairness and equity.
4. Any Legislative Solution Should Not Result in an Arbitrary or Hidden Tax In-
crease
If the goal of corporate tax shelter legislation is to create incentives in our self-
assessment system for taxpayers to file tax returns that reflect the actual amount
of tax required to be paid under the law, then any such legislation should not be
crafted as a tax increase in disguise. If Congress wishes to raise taxes, it can do
so directly.
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00182 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
179
51 JCT Study at 220 (citing David C. Garlock, A Tax Executive’s Guide to Evaluating Tax-Ori-
ented Transactions, 17 Tax Mgmt. Wkly. Rep. 370 (1998) (noting, without providing any empir-
ical evidence, that the IRS routinely threatens penalties and offers to waive them in settle-
ments)). Moreover, to the extent that the JCT Study does provide statistics with regard to abate-
ment of interest and penalties, those statistics do not necessarily portray the whole picture,
which is that the IRS often ‘‘trades’’ penalties in exchange for concessions by taxpayers on other
issues as part of the settlement process.
52We recognize that the word ‘‘avoid’’ may have negative connotations; however, since the
time of Judge Hand’s assertion in Gregory, the ‘‘avoidance’’ of taxes is a universally accepted
description of legitimate tax planning.
The question that should be asked is whether the proposals under consideration
would result in an arbitrary or hidden tax increase because they:
• create strong structural incentives for taxpayers to overpay their taxes;
• give IRS revenue agents weapons that they can use to extract inappropriate
concessions from taxpayers;
• impose penalties on third parties that would likely be borne by corporate tax-
payers; and
• impose dead-weight costs in the form of substantial compliance and adminis-
trative burdens.
Unfortunately, again for the reasons explained below, the answer to these ques-
tions is likely to be yes. While presumably unintended, the proposals would result
in a hidden tax increase on corporate taxpayers.
IV. SPECIFIC COMMENTS ON THE JCT STUDY’S RECOMMENDATIONS
The JCT Study suffers from two fundamental flaws. First, the JCT Study fails
to establish a plausible case that the Treasury Department and the IRS do not have
the necessary tools to address the problems that they identify, and accordingly pre-
sumes the need for the creation of new and enhanced penalties. To be sure, the JCT
Study provides evidence of the perception of a corporate tax shelter problem; how-
ever, the only real evidence of a problem with the enforcement tools already avail-
able to the IRS is the JCT’s assertion that the IRS too often is willing to waive the
imposition of penalties.51 As the recent decisions of the Tax Court in UPS and
Compaq demonstrate, the IRS does assess, and the courts do impose, substantial
penalties in the context of ‘‘tax motivated’’ transactions. Second, even if the Con-
gress were to determine that a legislative response is appropriate, the JCT Study’s
recommendations violate the criteria outlined above for evaluating proposed statu-
tory changes: they would interfere with ordinary tax planning activities, they would
result in additional complexity, they would result in arbitrary or hidden tax in-
creases, and they would violate basic notions of fairness and equity.
Following are comments on the specific proposals, and an evaluation of those pro-
posals in light of the general framework suggested above.
A. COMMENTS ON SPECIFIC PROPOSALS
The Proposed Definition of Corporate Tax Shelters is Overly Broad and Needlessly
Complex
Section 6662(d)(2)(C)(ii) defines the term ‘‘tax shelter’’ for purposes of the substan-
tial understatement penalty as:
A partnership or other entity, any investment plan or arrangement, or any
other plan or arrangement, if a significant purpose of such partnership, en-
tity, plan, or arrangement is the avoidance or evasion of Federal income
tax.
This definition, which turns on the meaning of a ‘‘significant purpose,’’ is widely
viewed as extremely broad and uncertain. Indeed, it is arguable that the definition
encompasses all matters where tax planning is involved because the essence of tax
planning is to ‘‘avoid’’ tax liabilities that would otherwise arise if the transaction
or activity were structured or conducted in some other way.52 Under current law,
the ramifications of this open-ended definition are limited to procedural matters
(e.g., the imposition of a twenty percent penalty if a substantial understatement re-
sults, unless the taxpayer has substantial authority for its position and reasonably
believed that it was more likely than not to prevail on the merits.) Under the JCT
Study’s proposal, however, the uncertainty inherent in the definition of a ‘‘corporate
tax shelter’’ would have far more serious consequences (e.g., a taxpayer that engages
in a Covered Transaction but misapprehends the need to disclose would face a man-
datory forty percent penalty if the taxpayer loses on the merits).
The breadth of the underlying definition of ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’ is neither cir-
cumscribed nor clarified by the addition of the five Tax Shelter Indicators. As ex-
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00183 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
180
53The Doggett Bill would create a similar degree of uncertainty by retaining the vague defini-
tion of current law and adding a new definition for ‘‘noneconomic tax attributes.’’
54The Doggett Bill also inappropriately targets transactions involving tax-indifferent parties.
55 Similarly, the Doggett Bill would create a presumption that tax benefits should be dis-
allowed when the benefits ‘‘are not reflected...on the taxpayer’s books and records for financial
reporting purposes.’’
plained below, the Tax Shelter Indicators are explicitly intended to encompass rou-
tine tax planning activities and are potentially vague and subjective in their appli-
cation.53
a. The reasonably expected pre-tax profit from the arrangement is insignificant rel-
ative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits. For purposes of this factor, the JCT
Study states that the present value of the relevant amounts would be determined
using a discount rate equal to the short-term applicable Federal rate plus one per-
centage point (100 basis points). The use of this mandatory discount rate in valuing
cash flows would mean that many financing and pre-tax arbitrage transactions
(when the market routinely seeks profits measured in less than 100 basis points)
could be covered. A review of basic data that everyone in the bond market has ac-
cess to supports the conclusion that the proposed discount rate does not reflect what
goes on in the ‘‘real world.’’ Concerns regarding the potential implications of this
rule are amplified by the fact that, as noted below, the JCT Study views an invest-
ment in tax-exempt bonds as a corporate tax shelter, presumably based on an appli-
cation of this mandatory discount rate. Indeed, nearly every purchase of preferred
stock or tax-exempt bonds would be below the yield indicated by the mandatory dis-
count rate.
b. The arrangement involves a tax-indifferent participant, and (a) results in tax-
able income materially in excess of economic income to the tax-indifferent participant;
(b) permits a corporate participant to characterize items in a more favorable manner
or (c) results in a non-economic increase, creation, multiplication or shifting of basis.
The use of a Tax Shelter Indicator that turns on the participation of a tax-indif-
ferent party is troubling for several reasons. First, the targeting of transactions that
involve categories of taxpayers that the Congress has determined are worthy of ex-
emption from tax, including Native American tribal organizations and other tax-ex-
empt organizations, effectively overrides the tax exemptions that such organizations
currently enjoy. If the Congress determines that there are circumstances in which
these organizations should be taxed, a more appropriate approach would be to either
repeal their exemptions or expand the scope of the unrelated business income tax.
Second, the use of tax-indifferent parties in the definition of a corporate tax shelter
would create a new kind of uncertainty for other taxpayers that participate in the
transaction, in that such participants could wind up subject to deficiencies and pen-
alties for the simple reason that they did not know whether another party to the
same transaction falls within the proposed definition of a tax-indifferent partici-
pant.54
c. The reasonably expected net tax benefits are significant, and the arrangement
involves a tax indemnity or similar agreement for the benefit of the corporate partici-
pant other than a customary indemnity in an acquisition or other business trans-
action entered into with a principal in the transaction. The JCT Study’s discussion
of ‘‘customary indemnity agreements’’ fails to consider a host of transactions in
which a tax indemnity is provided in the ordinary course. A few of the many exam-
ples include the dividends received deduction indemnity that accompanies every pri-
vate placement of preferred stock and the withholding tax indemnity that accom-
panies every cross-border securitization or financing. Depending upon how the ‘‘cus-
tomary’’ standard is interpreted, this factor could sweep in a large number of rou-
tine business transactions.
d. The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are significant,
and the arrangement is reasonably expected to create a ‘‘permanent difference’’ for
U.S. financial reporting purposes under generally accepted accounting principles.
This factor alone would apply to numerous routine business activities and trans-
actions, including many where corporate tax planning may not be a significant con-
sideration.55 Some of the more common examples involve stock options, tax exempt
municipal bonds, the dividends received deduction and special tax credits (e.g., low-
income housing credit under Section 42). Moreover, by their nature, permanent
book/tax differences are already disclosed to the IRS as part of the Form 1120
Schedule M–1 reconciliation.
e. The reasonably expected net tax benefits from the arrangement are significant
and the arrangement is designed so that the corporate participant incurs little (if
any) additional economic risk as a result of entering into the arrangement. The
breadth of this factor is illustrated by the fact that, as currently worded, it arguably
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00184 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
181
covers all borrowings (because, as commonly understood, the lender is the party tak-
ing the risk), hedging transactions, defeasance transactions, insurance transactions,
credit support transactions (including guarantees and letters of credit), and all
transactions among members of an affiliated group (including all financing trans-
actions, intercompany transactions and arrangements regarding the repatriation of
dividends). While this may not have been intended, it is a straight-forward reading
of the proposal—and certainly a reading that enterprising IRS agents might assert.
The extraordinary breadth of the corporate tax shelter definition, and the list of
Tax Shelter Indicators, is best illustrated by example. One starting point is the rou-
tine corporate tax planning transactions that the JCT Study itself acknowledges are
Covered Transactions. The JCT Study treats all of the following as Reportable
Transactions, meaning that they are all Covered Transactions described by one or
more Tax Shelter Indicators:
All leveraged lease transactions. The JCT Study would exempt lease transactions
that satisfy the criteria of Rev. Proc. 75–21 (or the relevant case law thereunder)
from the 30-day Disclosure requirement, acknowledging that the volume of these
transactions is so significant that disclosure would be unduly burdensome on both
taxpayers and the IRS. Nonetheless, the JCT Study apparently views all leveraged
leasing transactions as ‘‘corporate tax shelters,’’ presumably because the typical pre-
tax profit of one to four percent that investors expect in a leveraged lease trans-
action would fall short under the mandatory discount rate that the JCT staff rec-
ommended, even though one to four percent would be significantly more than the
de minimis standard of Sheldon v. Commissioner, 94 T.C. 738 (1990). Thus, one of
the most common techniques for raising capital to finance airplane acquisitions and
acquisitions of heavy equipment by utilities and others—transactions that have
been expressly sanctioned by the IRS and serve an important function in the domes-
tic and international capital markets—are tainted with the ‘‘corporate tax shelter’’
label. In this regard, it is also worth noting that numerous leveraged lease trans-
actions fail (or arguably fail) to meet one or more of the Rev. Proc. 75–21 require-
ments yet are routinely respected as true leases by the IRS. Presumably, however,
any leveraged lease transaction that does not satisfy the criteria of Rev. Proc. 75–
21, even if otherwise sanctioned as a true lease, could be subject to these reporting
requirements.
Investments in low-income housing projects, tax exempt bonds, foreign sales cor-
porations (‘‘FSCs’’) and Domestic International Sales Corporations (‘‘DISCs’’) The
JCT Study recommends that the Secretary be allowed to provide an exemption from
the 30-Day and Tax Return Disclosure requirements for corporate taxpayers that
avail themselves of these provisions of the Code. Presumably, investments in low
income housing and tax exempt bonds are Reportable Transactions because they fail
to satisfy the minimum return standard of the first Tax Shelter Indicator. While
FSC’s and DISC’s are Covered Transactions, it is not entirely clear why the JCT
Study also views them as Reportable Transactions. It is also interesting to note that
the JCT Study did not include corporate investments in preferred stock as poten-
tially exempt from the Tax Return Disclosure requirements. The volume of these
transactions is, if anything, greater than the volume of leasing and tax exempt bond
transactions. By treating tax advantaged investments that Congress has specifically
sanctioned as Covered Transactions, and therefore corporate tax shelters per se, the
JCT Study demonstrates the breadth of its definition. (Indeed, it even goes beyond
the White Paper, which would presume such investments to be outside the scope
of its corporate tax shelter proposals.)
An endless number of ordinary tax planning activities arguably are encompassed
by the general corporate tax shelter definition and the list of Tax Shelter Indicators.
As noted below, the risk that a transaction may constitute a corporate tax shelter—
or that a revenue agent may threaten to treat a transaction as a corporate tax shel-
ter—triggers a chain of events ranging from mandatory filing of additional informa-
tion to the imposition of draconian penalties. These consequences will arise rou-
tinely in the context of efforts by taxpayers ‘‘to arrange [their] affairs so that [their]
taxes will be as low as possible,’’ as Judge Hand observed was permissible, even if
‘‘actuated by a desire to avoid . . . taxation.’’ A few of the many tax planning activi-
ties that satisfy Judge Hand’s definition but would nonetheless be treated as cor-
porate tax shelters under the JCT Study include:
Changes in capital structure. Public companies routinely engage in stock buy-back
programs, often financed explicitly or implicitly with debt. In most instances, the
current cash flow costs of the debt are greater than the current cash flow ‘‘costs’’
associated with dividends on the repurchased common stock. Such transactions like-
ly would be treated as corporate tax shelters under the JCT’s recommendations be-
cause (i) they would be covered by the general definition of a corporate tax shelter
in that a significant purpose is the ‘‘avoidance of tax’’ through obtaining a current
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00185 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
182
56 In a recent field service advice memorandum, the IRS challenged exactly this type of inter-
nal corporate restructuring, stating that the primary purpose for creating the domestic holding
company was to reduce taxes. See FSA 1999–26011.
interest deduction, and (ii) they would be described by at least one of the Tax Shel-
ter Indicators because the reasonably expected pre-tax profits from the stock buy-
back program are insignificant relative to the reasonably expected net tax benefits.
Mergers, acquisitions and other corporate transactions. There are numerous cir-
cumstances where taxpayers engage in formalistic steps in the context of mergers,
acquisitions and other corporate transactions to achieve desired tax objectives or to
avoid otherwise negative tax consequences. Most of Subchapter C is predicated and
administered in reliance on mechanical rules, and steps that have little or no impact
on expected pre-tax profits routinely have major tax implications. Taxpayers rou-
tinely use—and the IRS routinely sanctions—these steps despite the fact that their
only purpose is to ‘‘avoid’’ taxes that would otherwise be due but for their inclusion
in the transaction. Examples include the formation of a holding company to qualify
an acquisition for tax-free treatment under Section 351; using transitory entities to
effectuate tax free reorganizations; using or changing a particular capital structure
to achieve (or avoid) tax free treatment; and using (or avoiding use of) particular
consideration to achieve (or avoid) tax free treatment. All of these transactions sat-
isfy both the generic definition of Covered Transactions and at least one of the Tax
Shelter Indicators (relating to expected pre-tax profits). Depending upon how the
standard is interpreted, they may also fit within the factor dealing with transactions
that have no economic risk but confer substantial tax benefits.
Routine transactions among members of an affiliated group (foreign, domestic, and
cross-border). A number of foreign corporate groups establish single holding compa-
nies to serve as parent companies of their U.S. consolidated tax groups.56 Alter-
natively, the foreign parent could establish separate U.S. corporate chains for each
business. Invariably, these choices are driven at least in part by consideration of the
tax benefits and detriments of consolidation. (The same, of course, applies to U.S.
holding companies.) The decision to create or change a consolidated structure would
likely satisfy both the generic definition of Covered Transactions and at least one
of the Tax Shelter Indicators (relating to expected pre-tax profits). Likewise, ‘‘plans’’
relating to the timing and source of repatriated earnings and the routine structuring
of non-US businesses by US taxpayers would satisfy both the generic definition and
at least one Tax Shelter Indicator. Interestingly enough, while inter company pric-
ing decisions are arguably not covered by the generic definition (the taxpayer is sup-
posed to be looking for the ‘‘right’’ answer), inter company pricing decisions arguably
meet one or more Tax Shelter Indicators because the pricing has a significant im-
pact on the taxpayer’s tax liability but may not have any overall economic impact
(in terms of profitability or risk) on the consolidated enterprise.
Once again, what is important to emphasize is that all of the JCT Study’s penalty
and disclosure recommendations are built on the same foundation—the JCT Study’s
definition of corporate tax shelters. That definition encompasses the entire range of
legitimate tax planning activities which, in the corporate context, covers most trans-
actions and many routine business operations.
2. The Registration, Disclosure and Certification Requirements Would Impose Sig-
nificant and Unnecessary Paperwork and Administrative Burdens on Taxpayers and
Third Parties
The JCT Study identifies two reasons for their registration, reporting and disclo-
sure recommendations: to provide the IRS with an effective ‘‘early-warning’’ device
of new transactions that it may wish to address and to assist the IRS in the exam-
ination of taxpayers. While each of these objectives is appropriate, the requirements
should be consistent with their stated purposes and should not impose unnecessary
paperwork or administrative burdens on taxpayers and third parties involved in
their transactions.
The disclosure recommendations set forth in the JCT Study violate these stand-
ards in several ways. Again, the starting point is the breadth of Covered Trans-
actions. The IRS is certain to be inundated with registration forms and disclosure
documents from ‘‘promoters,’’ taxpayers and third parties, undermining the stated
goal of providing the IRS with a usable ‘‘early warning’’ system. Moreover, JCT
Study mandates ‘‘long-form’’ registration and disclosure documents, despite experi-
ence suggesting that this type of information may be far less helpful than some type
of ‘‘short-form’’ disclosure. Finally, the 30-Day Disclosure rule for corporate tax-
payers is entirely superfluous. Particularly given the breadth of the Tax Shelter In-
dicators and the promoter registration requirements, it will not further the early
warning objective; indeed, it will make matters worse for the IRS and Treasury. The
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00186 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
183
57The Doggett Bill also would require duplicative filings, within thirty days of closing a trans-
action and again with the tax return.
58The same problem would obtain under the Doggett Bill, because it would require a state-
ment signed by a senior financial officer as to the truth of the underlying facts.
30-day Disclosure rule also has nothing to do with the examination of the taxpayer,
because that same disclosure is required on the taxpayer’s tax return.
a. The disclosure requirements on corporate taxpayers are unduly burdensome, es-
pecially given the breadth of Covered Transactions. As a preliminary matter, tax-
payers would have to determine whether a Covered Transaction was also a Report-
able Transaction (i.e., described by one or more of the Tax Shelter Indicators). For
reasons noted above, that determination is itself quite complex. Moreover, given the
scope of the Tax Shelter Indicators, the 30-day Disclosure rule would be tantamount
to a year-round filing requirement that bears no relationship whatsoever to the real
world process of return preparation. Because many financing transactions undergo
numerous changes before closing, such a short period during which to file a detailed
disclosure is impractical. The burdensome nature of this requirement is further evi-
denced by the fact that the same information must be provided a second time to
comply with the Tax Return Disclosure Requirements.57 Finally, by mandating long-
form disclosure, the recommendation will create mountains of needless paperwork
for both the IRS and corporate taxpayers in connection with transactions where
there is no issue or uncertainty whatsoever regarding proper tax treatment of the
disclosed item.
b. Requiring a senior executive familiar with all aspects of a transaction to sign
off on corporate tax shelters is unnecessary and unduly burdensome. In the first in-
stance, this requirement is redundant because the tax director or other senior cor-
porate officer already signs the tax return under penalties of perjury. Moreover, in
light of the breadth of the definition of a corporate tax shelter, which would encom-
pass routine business transactions and ordinary tax planning activities, the require-
ment would apply to an array of transactions that should not concern the Executive
Branch or the Congress, let alone the chief financial officer or other senior execu-
tives of a corporate taxpayer. In order to satisfy the certification requirements, sen-
ior executives outside the tax function would be required to devote substantial time,
effort and money to business activities and tax matters having nothing to do with
their corporate responsibilities.58 Finally, the broad scope of the underlying disclo-
sure requirement makes the certification requirement all that much more onerous.
c. The recommendation in the JCT Study that transactions be disclosed to share-
holders if the understatement penalty is at least $1 million undercuts the materiality
standards currently used by the SEC. It also continues a peculiar and troublesome
precedent by giving the tax writing Committees direct jurisdiction over disclosures
required by the securities laws. Moreover, while the JCT Study implies that disclo-
sure would deter inappropriate tax planning because management would not want
to be criticized, the opposite may well be true. In the context of a system that im-
poses penalties on routine tax planning, when (as described below) a corporation
will be penalized even if it has a better than 50–50 chance of prevailing, an occa-
sional penalty may be viewed (correctly) as evidence that management is properly
discharging its fiduciary duties to shareholders.
d. Two other forms of administrative burden are critically important but not ad-
dressed by either the White Paper or the JCT Study. The stakes associated with dis-
closure and certification are quite high. The failure to make proper disclosure will
trigger a forty percent penalty that cannot be waived if the matter involves a Re-
portable Transaction and the taxpayer loses on the merits. The failure to make
proper disclosure will trigger a twenty percent penalty that cannot be waived if the
matter involves a Covered Transaction that is not a Reportable Transaction if the
taxpayer satisfies the substantial authority standard but does not satisfy the more
likely than not standard. The certification requirement is a threat that speaks for
itself in the hands of a revenue agent. Under these circumstances, taxpayers could
and would be subject to two examinations by the IRS—one regarding the correct-
ness of their tax returns and another regarding the question of whether each item
challenged by the IRS was a Covered Transaction, whether each Covered Trans-
action was a Reportable Transaction, and whether the disclosure (if any) satisfied
the long-form disclosure requirements.
Not only is this ‘‘second examination’’ itself a source of substantial administrative
burden, but the disclosure requirements will also increase burdens associated with
the examination of the taxpayer’s return. This will occur for two reasons. First, any
time a matter is disclosed, the IRS revenue agent will need to review the disclosure
and likely feel compelled to discuss the matter with the taxpayer. Given the breadth
of the definition of Covered Transactions, this will result in substantial wasted time
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00187 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
184
59Although the JCT Study would require only ‘‘a summary and analysis of the corporate par-
ticipant’s rationale and analysis underlying the tax treatment of the Reportable Transaction in-
cluding the substantive authority relied upon to support such treatment,’’ the reality of cor-
porate tax practice and the advice provided corporate taxpayers by their tax advisors is that
a corporate tax director will analyze all of the authorities that potentially apply to the purported
tax treatment, including any contrary authorities and any authorities that an IRS agent might
attempt to apply to disregard the purported tax treatment. In this regard, it is worth noting
that the IRS always requires a taxpayer requesting a private letter ruling to identify and dis-
cuss any contrary authorities. See Rev. Proc. 99–1, 1999–1 I.R.B. 6.
60 In contrast to the intent of the JCT Study, the Doggett Bill intentionally would create a
strict liability penalty (i.e., non-waivable penalties), with no exceptions for substantial authority
or reasonable cause.
by taxpayers and the IRS. Second, the long-form disclosure requirements can be
read to require a discussion of all potential theories that the IRS could use to attack
the transaction, including those that have little merit (especially, given the stakes
associated with inadequate disclosure and the fact that a disclosure may be inad-
equate even if the facts and issues that ultimately determine the outcome of the
case are fully disclosed).59 In the real world of IRS audits, revenue agents routinely
assert any and all theories to support a proposed adjustment, including many that
are groundless. Under these circumstances, the disclosure requirements are a ticket
to expensive, time-consuming, and needless arguments over theories that should not
be raised.
3. The Proposed Penalty Structure Amounts to a Strict Liability Sanction on Most
Tax Planning Activities
Despite its claim to the contrary, the JCT Study’s substantial understatement
penalty recommendations amount to a ‘‘strict liability’’ penalty on Covered Trans-
actions.60 As a preliminary matter, the penalty could not be waived or compromised
by the IRS. Thus, IRS agents would be obligated to assert the penalty on all Cov-
ered Transactions when the IRS proposes a tax deficiency. As noted above, these
recommendations, which are based on the JCT Study’s definition of corporate tax
shelters, encompass a range of legitimate tax planning activities which, in the cor-
porate context, covers most transactions and many routine business operations.
Simply reciting the Joint Committee’s proposed rules with respect to the ability
to abate the substantial understatement penalty demonstrates their substantive and
procedural complexity. To wit:
• If a taxpayer engages in a Covered Transaction that is a Reportable Trans-
action, it would be subject to a non-waivable forty percent penalty unless (i) the tax-
payer wins on the merits or (ii) the taxpayer establishes that: (A) it properly dis-
closed the transaction, (B) it satisfied the seventy-five percent standard, and (C) the
transaction served a Material Non-tax Business Purpose.
• If a taxpayer engages in a Covered Transaction that is not a Reportable Trans-
action, it would be subject to a non-waivable forty percent penalty unless (i) the tax-
payer wins on the merits or (ii) the taxpayer establishes that: (A) it satisfied the
seventy-five percent standard and (B) the transaction served a Material Non-tax
Business Purpose.
• If a taxpayer engages in a Covered Transaction that is a Reportable Trans-
action (and does not win on the merits), the forty percent penalty would be reduced
to a non-waivable twenty percent penalty only if the taxpayer can establish that (i)
the taxpayer properly disclosed the transaction and (ii) the taxpayer satisfied the
substantial authority (forty percent) standard.
• If a taxpayer engages in a Covered Transaction that is not a Reportable Trans-
action (and does not win on the merits), the forty percent penalty would be reduced
to a non-waivable twenty percent penalty only if (i) the taxpayer can establish that
(A) the taxpayer properly disclosed the transaction and (B) the taxpayer satisfied
the substantial authority (forty percent) standard, or (ii) the taxpayer can establish
that it satisfied the more likely than not standard.
What is important to note are the circumstances in which taxpayers will be sub-
ject to strict liability (i.e., non-waivable) penalties if they do not prevail on the mer-
its. Following are a few of the many striking examples:
• A corporate taxpayer engages in a Covered Transaction (i.e., a transaction that
involves tax planning) that it fully discloses, under circumstances where it has a
Material Non-tax Business Purpose and reasonably believes that it has a better
than fifty percent—but less than a seventy-five percent—chance of prevailing in liti-
gation. The corporation is subject to a non-waivable penalty unless it wins its case
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00188 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
185
61Presumably, when the IRS concedes more than seventy-five percent of an issue, the IRS
would also concede that the taxpayer satisfied the highly confident standard.
62Presumably, when a taxpayer concedes more than twenty-five percent of an issue, the tax-
payer will be hard pressed to convince the IRS that it satisfied the highly confident standard.
63This assumes that because the taxpayer will not owe additional taxes, it will not be subject
to penalty—even if the taxpayer’s claim is substantially or entirely without merit.
in court or obtains a greater than seventy-five percent concession from the govern-
ment.61
• A corporate taxpayer engages in a Covered Transaction that is a Reportable
Transaction under circumstances where reasonable tax professionals believe that
the taxpayer has better than a seventy-five percent chance of sustaining the claimed
tax treatment, and the taxpayer has a Material-Non Tax Business Purpose for en-
gaging in the transaction. The taxpayer discloses the transaction, but omits certain
of the information required by the disclosure rules. If the corporation loses the case
in litigation, or concedes more than twenty-five percent of the issue in settlement,
it will be subject to a non-waivable forty percent penalty.62
• A corporate taxpayer engages in a transaction under circumstances where it
reasonably believes that it has a better than one-in-three chance of prevailing, but
less than a four-in-ten chance of prevailing, and it fully discloses the transaction on
its return. If the taxpayer does not prevail in litigation, the taxpayer will be subject
to a non-waivable penalty of at least twenty percent.
• A corporate taxpayer will be subject to a non-waivable penalty with respect to
Covered Transactions if it cannot convince the (undeniably reasonable) judge who
has just decided the case against it that a reasonable professional would believe
that the taxpayer had a better than seventy-five percent chance of prevailing.
The last example is one illustration of a more general point regarding the highly
confident standard. The taxpayer can satisfy this standard only if it can establish
that ‘‘a reasonable tax practitioner’’ would believe that the taxpayer had at least a
seventy-five percent chance of prevailing on the merits. As a practical matter, this
standard is unworkable. It means that the IRS revenue agent would have to con-
clude that proposed adjustment was proper, but that ‘‘reasonable tax practitioners’’
(including, presumably, the IRS revenue agent proposing the adjustment) would be-
lieve that the taxpayer had at least a seventy-five percent chance of prevailing.
Likewise, it is difficult to envision an appeals officer settling an item by conceding
less than seventy-five percent of the issue, yet concluding that the taxpayer had a
better than seventy-five percent chance of prevailing. Finally, a court would have
to conclude that the taxpayer was wrong on the merits, but that reasonable tax pro-
fessionals (including, presumably, the judge hearing the matter) would believe that
the taxpayer had a seventy-five percent chance of success. While all of this may be
possible in theory, the practical effect is that the taxpayer will be liable for the pen-
alty if the taxpayer loses on the merits.
Once again, the starting point is the breadth of the definition of Covered Trans-
actions. These and other examples make it clear that the JCT Study’s proposal
amounts to a strict liability penalty on routine tax planning activities, and on the
inevitable foot faults that will occur in complying with a complex set of rules. The
fact that this is a strict liability standard in the ‘‘real world’’ is already acknowl-
edged by the IRS: appeals officers are instructed to concede cases when the taxpayer
has a better than eighty percent chance of success.
Two other practical implications of this regime are worth noting. First, as noted
above, the JCT Study proposals would distort and undermine the settlement proc-
ess. More fundamentally, while not stated in so many words, the JCT Study pro-
poses going to a system where the only way that a corporate taxpayer can be certain
to avoid penalties with respect to any item on its return is to pay taxes with respect
to that item, file a claim for refund that is denied, and commence litigation in Dis-
trict Court or Claims Court.63 In essence, the JCT Study is saying that when the
outcome of a transaction that involves tax planning is less than certain, the tax-
payer should overpay its taxes and sue for a refund.
While the many implications of this regime are beyond the scope of this paper,
it is obvious that the JCT Study is recommending a far-reaching and fundamental
change in our system of voluntary compliance and dispute resolution.
4. The Proposed Penalties on Tax Return Preparers, together with the Proposed Pen-
alties on Third Parties Involved in Covered Transactions, Would Create Funda-
mental Conflicts of Interest Between Taxpayers and their Advisors
The JCT Study creates fundamental and irreconcilable conflicts between a tax-
payer and its advisors. Quite simply, all return preparers, and all those involved
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00189 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
186
64The JCT Study also recommends increasing the second tier penalty to the greater of $1,000
or one hundred percent of the preparer’s fees.
65See supra footnote 11.
66The advisor penalty is a strict liability sanction for two reasons. First, as noted above, advi-
sors are subject to an even higher ‘‘highly confident’’ standard than corporate taxpayers (advi-
sors apparently fail to satisfy this standard if even one reasonable professional would conclude
that the taxpayer had less than a seventy-five percent chance of succeeding on the merits).
Moreover, as noted above, there is no realistic possibility that a court would decide against the
taxpayer and then conclude that all reasonable tax professionals believed that the taxpayer had
a better than seventy-five percent chance of success.
in advising corporations regarding Covered Transactions, have an overwhelming in-
centive to make certain that the taxpayer overpays its (his or her) taxes.
a. The JCT Study recommends penalties on tax professionals that will routinely
exceed their net after-tax income. The JCT Study proposes increasing the first tier
tax return preparer penalty to the greater of $250 or fifty percent of the preparer’s
fee.64 The preparer can avoid this penalty only if: (i) the item satisfies the more like-
ly than not standard or (ii) is properly disclosed and satisfies the 4-in–10 standard.
It also recommends a penalty equal to the greater of $100,000 or fifty percent of
the tax advisor’s fees if the advisor directly or indirectly advises the taxpayer that
it has a better than seventy-five percent chance of prevailing on the merits with re-
spect to a Covered Transaction.
b. The JCT Study would authorize the IRS Director of Practice to impose further
penalties on tax professionals, including sanctions that could prevent them from con-
tinuing to represent or advise taxpayers. While it is somewhat cryptic, the JCT
Study appears to recommend that Congress: (i) provide specific statutory authoriza-
tion for Circular 230; (ii) require that the IRS modify Circular 230 to conform to
the JCT Study’s recommendations (including but not limited to the corporate tax
shelter proposals); (iii) define practice before the IRS to include the rendering of tax
advice; (iv) require automatic referral to the Director of Practice whenever a pre-
parer or advisor is subject to a penalty; (v) authorize the Director of Practice to im-
pose monetary sanctions of up to one hundred percent of the fees received by pre-
parers and advisors with respect to sanctioned conduct; (vi) authorize the Director
of Practice to suspend or revoke the right of the preparer or advisor to practice be-
fore the IRS (including, the rendering of tax advice); and (vii) require the Director
of Practice to notify the appropriate state licensing authorities if the advisor or pre-
parer is subject to any sanction (including, a letter of reprimand). While not entirely
clear, it appears that tax professionals could be liable for both the preparer pen-
alties and Circular 230 monetary sanctions in connection with the same transaction.
In other words, the Code-based penalties on preparers and advisors could well
amount to more than one hundred percent of their after-tax income.65 Under cir-
cumstances where these penalties are triggered, the preparer or advisor must be re-
ferred to the Director of Practice who has the authority to impose another penalty
equal to more than the preparer’s or advisor’s pre-tax/pre-Code penalty income. Not
to mention the fact that the Director of Practice can take away the preparer’s or
advisor’s future right to make a living as a tax professional, and the fact that if the
Director so much as issues a letter of reprimand, the preparer or advisor must be
prepared to defend himself or herself before state licensing authorities.
With this penalty and sanctions structure as background, it is worth revisiting
when advisors and preparers will be subject to the Code-based penalties and the
chain of events that those penalties will trigger:
• All return preparers (including those representing non-corporate taxpayers,
and including those representing corporations on matters that are not Covered
Transactions) are subject to a penalty if the return position has a less than forty
percent chance of success on the merits.
• All return preparers are subject to a penalty if the return position has a forty
percent or greater chance of success, but less than a fifty percent chance of success,
unless the item meets the applicable disclosure rules.
• All those involved in advising a corporate taxpayer are subject to a penalty if
they advise the taxpayer with respect to a Covered Transaction (i.e., routine tax
planning activities) that it satisfies the highly confident standard under cir-
cumstances where the taxpayer ultimately does not prevail on the merits.66
When all of these proposals are viewed together, it is clear that preparers and
advisors have overwhelming incentives to: (i) make certain that taxpayers call every
close question (and most not-so-close questions) in favor of the IRS; (ii) make certain
that taxpayers disclose questionable items and make certain that the disclosure is
overly broad; (iii) encourage taxpayers to overpay their taxes and sue for refunds;
and (iv) document their communications with their clients in a way that serves their
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00190 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
187
67As noted above, The JCT Study implicitly stands for the proposition that taxpayers can en-
gage in any type of tax planning they choose—but only if they are willing to pre-pay their taxes
and sue for a refund. It seems apparent that this construct will, in the real world, materially
inhibit legitimate tax planning.
own best interests, and to disclose client confidences as a means of defending
against penalty assertions.
THE JCT STUDY’S PROPOSALS VIOLATE ALL FOUR CRITERIA THAT SHOULD BE USED
IN EVALUATING LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS TO ADDRESS CORPORATE TAX SHELTERS
1. The Recommendations Made in the JCT Study Would Interfere With Mainstream
Business Transactions and Ordinary Tax Planning Activities
While the JCT Study sets forth comprehensive and well-intended proposals for
fundamental reform of the rules governing taxpayer compliance, we believe that sig-
nificant issues exist with these proposals and that they would benefit from further
review. For a number of reasons, the JCT Study’s proposal would inhibit routine
business transactions and customary tax planning activities. Most obvious, of
course, are the administrative costs, reporting burdens and strict liability penalties
that would be imposed on corporate taxpayers. The underlying definition of Covered
Transactions is so broad, and the sanctions are so draconian, that taxpayers will
minimize their costs and their risks by simply not engaging in widely accepted, and
entirely appropriate, tax planning activities.
The less obvious, but equally important reason, is that preparers and advisors
have an overwhelming incentive to discourage tax planning under circumstances
where their risks are substantially disproportionate to their potential benefits. The
JCT Study asserts that tax professionals have a dual responsibility to their clients
and the tax system. The practical effect of the JCT Study’s recommendations is to
require that preparers and advisors show single-minded devotion to the IRS. It is
inevitable that under this regime taxpayers will not engage in entirely appropriate
tax planning activities—unless they are big enough, and have sufficient cash, to in-
ternalize the process and routinely engage in refund litigation.67
The question posed above was whether the White Paper and JCT Study rec-
ommendations would impede legitimate tax planning. The answer to that question
is unequivocally yes.
2. The Recommendations Made in the JCT Study Would Impose Needless Complexity
The rules recommended in the JCT Study are overly complex for a multitude of
reasons, including the following:
• They raise difficult questions of substantive interpretation and application
(what is a Covered Transaction, is a Covered Transaction a Reportable Transaction,
is disclosure required, is the disclosure adequate, are the taxpayer’s odds of success
74% or 76%, 49% or 51%, 39% or 41%).
• They codify a two-tier audit system: the correctness of the taxpayer’s return
and the taxpayer’s compliance with disclosure rules and penalty provisions.
• They create ‘‘cliff’’ effects that the tax system should avoid (the taxpayer’s li-
ability for penalties can fluctuate dramatically depending upon a one percent swing
in its chances of success).
• Given the scope of Covered Transactions, the disclosure and certification re-
quirements are extremely burdensome.
• They place a premium on needless documentation of routine transactions and
activities by taxpayers, preparers and advisors.
• The 30-Day Disclosure requirement is extremely burdensome and entirely un-
necessary.
• They impose significant practical barriers to the settlement of most tax dis-
putes.
3. The Recommendations Made in the JCT Study Violate Basic Notions of Fairness
and Equity
The recommendations made in the JCT Study, which was written in response to
a congressional request for legislative recommendations to simplify penalty or inter-
est administration and reduce taxpayer burden, violate fundamental notions of neu-
trality and fair play in many respects.
• For the reasons explained above, they create a structural bias that will cause
taxpayers to systematically over-pay their taxes.
• They arm IRS revenue agents, appeals officers, and attorneys with the weap-
ons to extract inappropriate concessions from taxpayers (both directly, and through
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00191 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6621 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
188
68See JCT Study at 207; White Paper at 17. For example, both the installment sale trans-
actions and the transactions involving transfers of property subject to liabilities, which are iden-
tified as examples of corporate tax shelters by the JCT Study and the White Paper, involved
attempts to exploit inconsistencies in the tax law and the IRS’s interpretation of complex rules.
69One way to illustrate this point is to use the JCT Study’s own assumptions regarding be-
havior. If the proposals are successful in assuring that taxpayers generally take taxpayer-favor-
able positions only when their chances of success are forty percent or greater, and generally en-
gage in Reportable Transactions only when their chances for success are greater than seventy-
five percent, then taxpayers will necessarily over pay their taxes. This is especially true under
circumstances where the IRS can (and routinely does) assert claims when it’s chances of success
range from zero to forty percent.
70Moreover, even when the Treasury Department is not certain whether a transaction is trou-
blesome, it increasingly attaches broad anti-abuse rules to otherwise objective regulations. See,
e.g., Treas. Reg. §1.367(e)–2(d) (establishing broad anti-abuse rule authorizing the IRS to re-
quire gain recognition on otherwise tax-free liquidations ‘‘when a principal purpose of the liq-
uidation is the avoidance of U.S. tax’’).
pressure on taxpayer representatives). It is absolutely certain that these weapons
will be used improperly by some IRS employees (because they don’t understand the
rules or are overzealous).
• The proposals permit the government to avoid accountability for the rules that
it writes. As both the JCT Study and the White Paper acknowledge, many of the
transactions targeted by their recommendations result from the complexity of the
Code and attempts to exploit inconsistencies in the tax law.68 The White Paper and
JCT Study proposals reduce any incentive that the government might otherwise
have to write neutral rules and simplify the tax system.
• The proposals impose standards on taxpayers and third parties that are far
more onerous than the standards imposed on the government. The JCT Study and
the White paper emphasize the importance of the public’s confidence in the basic
fairness of the tax system. One sure way to destroy this confidence is to impose on-
erous requirements on citizens that the government refuses to live by. The White
Paper and JCT Study proposals violate this fundamental norm of good government.
To cite a few examples, IRS agents can assert frivolous positions against taxpayers
with no consequences to the institution or the individuals involved. IRS attorneys
can advise their IRS clients to take frivolous positions against taxpayers with no
financial or professional consequences to them. The IRS can issue 30-day and 90-
day letters challenging Covered Transactions that do not include the information re-
quired of taxpayers in their disclosure statements. The District Director is not re-
quired to certify under penalties of perjury that a 30-day or 90-day letter chal-
lenging Covered Transactions is true, accurate and complete. The courts are in-
structed to enjoin the marketing of a Covered Transaction even when the IRS has
no realistic possibility of success on the merits.
For these and other reasons, the response to the third question is also yes. The
White Paper and JCT Report do violate basic notions of fairness and equity.
4. The Recommendations Made in the JCT Study Would Result in Arbitrary and
Hidden Tax Increases
The White Paper and JCT Study proposals amount to an arbitrary and hidden
tax increase for all of the reasons noted above. Taxpayers are given strong incen-
tives to over pay their taxes, and preparers are given stronger incentives to make
sure that happens. The IRS is given weapons to extract inappropriate concessions
from taxpayers, and preparers are given incentives to make certain that taxpayers
go along.69 Not only would the proposals result in a tax increase, they would result
in the worst kind of tax increase—one that is not transparent, is not neutral, and
can be arbitrarily imposed by individual employees of the government.
The proposals would also result in a second kind of equally troublesome tax in-
crease in the form of increased dead-weight compliance costs. While these costs are
not technically ‘‘tax increases,’’ they have the same practical effect.
CONCLUSION
There is no evidence that corporate tax shelters are severely eroding the corporate
tax base. While concerns have been expressed, the IRS is pursuing enforcement ef-
forts, including the assertion of penalties, and the courts have sided with the IRS
in a number of well-publicized cases. The Treasury Department is issuing regula-
tions (including retroactive rules) to address transactions that it finds trouble-
some.70 At some point, the IRS and the Treasury Department will implement the
tax shelter registration legislation that was enacted in 1997. The audit cycles for
returns filed after the enactment of the changes made in 1997 to the penalties with
respect to corporate tax shelters will begin in the next several years. IRS agents
are increasingly making use of recent IRS court victories to attack transactions on
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00192 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1
189
71See, e.g., T.A.M. 199934002 (May 24, 1999) (applying ACM Partnership and similar authori-
ties to conclude that the taxpayer’s nontax motives for securing its promises to pay employee
benefits lacked sufficient economic substance to cause them to be respected for Federal tax pur-
poses).
72See, e.g., FSA 199935019 (June 1, 1999) (IRS National Office instructed agent that ACM
Partnership and other economic substance cases were not applicable to transactions involving
contributions to capital); T.A.M. 9818004 (December 24, 1997) (IRS National Office refusing to
revoke a letter ruling allowing the taxpayer to change its method of accounting for service con-
tracts, finding that Ford Motor Co. was not applicable).
economic substance and similar grounds.71 These developments are of relatively re-
cent vintage, and will likely begin having an impact on taxpayer behavior. Under
these circumstances, we do not believe that the case has been made that more legis-
lation is necessary at this time.
There are some who believe that the pendulum is already starting to move in the
other direction, and that the primary challenge facing IRS executives and the Con-
gress will be reining in overzealous enforcement and litigation activity by the IRS.
In particular, as the courts place more reliance on the ‘‘common law’’ doctrines de-
scribed in the JCT Study, there is an increased risk that the IRS will move away
from the ‘‘rules based’’ system that the JCT Study endorses. In this regard, it is al-
ready clear that IRS agents are starting to rely on these common law principles in
situations that are wholly inappropriate and at the expense of the rules that have
been crafted by the Congress.72
Moreover, we believe that legislation would be ill-advised because the risks are
high that the proposals advanced to date would do more harm than good. This con-
cern is compounded by the realities of the legislative process. If the Congress enacts
legislation that leads to the adverse results that we and others anticipate, revenue
estimating conventions and the budget process would prevent the Congress from
undoing the damage. Indeed, the worse the adverse impact, the more difficult it
would be to remedy the situation.
Accordingly, we respectfully recommend that the Congress instruct the Treasury
Department to promulgate the regulations that were required in 1997, and to iden-
tify specific areas of the substantive tax law in which changes may be necessary.
Moreover, we recommend that the Congress instruct the IRS to develop a system
of obtaining statistically valid quantitative data to indicate where the IRS should
focus its enforcement efforts and where there are defects in the tax system that re-
quire legislative action. In addition, to make certain that the IRS has the resources
it needs to make use of the tools already available to it, Congress should continue
to provide adequate funding to the IRS (as it already has for the current fiscal year).
Æ
VerDate 20-JUL-2000 13:12 Jan 11, 2001 Jkt 060010 PO 00000 Frm 00193 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6011 K:\HEARINGS\66992.TXT WAYS1 PsN: WAYS1

