MAX PLANCK SOC IETY
Preprints of the
Max Planck Institute for
Research on Collective Goods
Bonn 2012/10
Effort and Redistribution: 
Better Cousins Than One 
Might Have Thought 
Claudia M. Buch 
Christoph Engel
    
Preprints of the 
Max Planck Institute 
for Research on Collective Goods Bonn 2012/10
Effort and Redistribution: 
Better Cousins Than One Might Have Thought 
Claudia M. Buch / Christoph Engel
March 2013 
revised version of:  
The Tradeoff Between Redistribution and Effort: Evidence from the Field and from the Lab,  
April 2012
Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods, Kurt-Schumacher-Str. 10, D-53113 Bonn 
http://www.coll.mpg.de
 Effort and Redistribution:  
Better Cousins Than One Might Have Thought ∗ 
 
 
 
 
Claudia M. Buch† / Christoph Engel‡ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We use survey and experimental data to explore how effort choices and preferences for redis-
tribution are linked. Under standard preferences, redistribution would reduce effort. This is 
different with social preferences. Using data from the World Value Survey, we find that re-
spondents with stronger preferences for redistribution tend to have weaker incentives to en-
gage in effort, but that the reverse does not hold true. Using a lab experiment, we show that 
redistribution choices even increase in imposed effort. Those with higher ability are willing to 
help the needy if earning income becomes more difficult for everybody.  
Keywords: Effort, redistribution, survey data, simultaneous equation models, experiment  
JEL: C31, C91,  D31, J28 
 
 
                                      
∗  We would like to thank Klaus Schmidt, Alia Gizatulina, Sebastian Goerg, Jörn Kleinert, Aniol Llorente-
Saguer, Friedrich Schneider, Hans Öhler, Ludger Wössmann, participants of the 4th CESifo Workshop on 
Political Economy (Dresden, November 2010), and participants of a seminar held at the Max Planck Institute 
in Bonn for most helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. All errors and inconsistencies are 
solely our own responsibility. We are grateful to the World Values Survey Association for giving us online 
access to their data (see www.worldvaluessurvey.org). This is a revised version of Claudia Buch/Christoph 
Engel: The Tradeoff Between Redistribution and Effort: Evidence from the Field and from the Lab. 
†  University of Tübingen, IAW, and CESifo 
‡  Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods, Bonn 
 2 
 
1. Motivation 
Increasing economic welfare by providing conditions for economic growth while, at the same 
time, ensuring a level of income equality which is accepted by society are two main goals of 
governments. In trying to reach these goals, governments face a trade-off: If governments tax 
income more heavily, everything else held constant, they have more scope for redistributing 
income, which may be desirable to meet fairness concerns. However, the higher the tax rate, 
the lower the incentives of those with a particularly high ability to work hard. Ultimately, a 
higher tax rate may mean less money for redistribution. Empirically, we observe that the de-
gree of redistribution has been growing in many countries (Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 2011: chapter 7). The standard explanation would be that the 
majority of voters with lower income expropriate their compatriots with a higher income. This 
policy trade off may change, however, if individuals have social preferences and prefer a 
more equal distribution of incomes. 
In this paper, we investigate the relationship between support for redistributive policies and 
effort, both theoretically and empirically.  If individuals hold standard preferences as, for in-
stance, in Persson et al. (2000), support for redistribution and effort are inversely related. In-
dividuals with higher than average ability exert more effort, but vote against redistribution. If 
redistribution is imposed, they reduce effort. If, in contrast, individuals have social prefer-
ences and are sufficiently averse against advantageous inequity as in (Fehr and Schmidt 
1999),  those with high ability may support redistribution. Individuals are even more likely to 
favor redistribution if inequity aversion is sensitive to fluctuations of earning possibilities 
over time. We thus have competing predictions.  
We use two complementary approaches to test these predictions empirically. The first ap-
proach has the advantage of higher external validity and broader geographical and temporal 
coverage, but forces us to rely on a rather elaborate econometric model for identification. We 
use cross-country survey data from the World Value Survey, following previous work analyz-
ing preferences for redistribution (Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln 2007; Alesina and Giuliano 
2009). In contrast to these previous studies, we estimate a simultaneous equation model, 
which explicitly allows for reverse causality between effort and redistribution. With this data, 
we can also investigate longer-run patterns, and we can control for the macroeconomic envi-
ronment. We are able to instrument either preference, and thereby overcome the identification 
problem resulting from the fact that, potentially, the willingness to exert effort and support for 
redistribution are determined interactively. 
The second and complementary empirical approach is a lab experiment. While redistribution 
preferences have previously been elicited in the lab, no experiment has simultaneously ma-
nipulated effort and elicited redistribution choices, and has manipulated redistribution levels 
and has elicited effort choices; this is what we do. In the lab, identification and hence internal 
validity are straightforward, but we replace labor market risk with the risk for student partici-
 3 
 
pants to leave the lab with less money than their peers. We thus have to face the characteristic 
loss in external validity. More specifically, within subjects, we sequentially (i) induce effort 
and elicit redistribution decisions, and (ii) induce a redistribution level and elicit effort choic-
es. In the survey data, we cannot observe ability directly, which is a likely determinant of both 
effort and redistribution preferences. And all we can see is stated support for redistribution 
explaining stated willingness to exert effort, and stated willingness to exert effort explaining 
stated support for redistribution. By contrast, the lab experiment allows explaining effort 
choices by the actual level of redistribution and decisions for a level of redistribution by the 
actual (imposed) degree of effort. Through random assignments, we can identify causal ef-
fects. 
We find that those in favor of more redistribution, and those exposed to a regime with more 
redistribution, are less willing to exert effort. Yet the opposite relationship does not hold: In 
the survey, support for redistribution is not explained by stated willingness to exert effort. In 
the lab, participants even choose a higher degree of redistribution if they are exogenously 
forced to exert higher effort. These findings are consistent with social preferences. 
Our findings shed new light on the political process determining the degree of redistribution. 
They suggest that even a substantial fraction of those who have to pay the bill support more 
redistribution. Yet we also find that the willingness to exert effort declines as the degree of 
redistribution increases. These preference patterns face policy makers with a hard choice: Ac-
cording to our data, a substantial majority supports greater redistribution, but in the future, all 
will be worse off due to the negative effect on effort. 
In the following second part, we explain in which ways our paper goes beyond what has al-
ready been done. In the third part, we sketch a theoretical model that shows the critical role of 
social preferences for understanding the relationship between effort and support for redistri-
bution at the individual level. We test the predictions in Part Four, based on survey data from 
the World Value Survey. Part Five provides complementary experimental evidence, and Part 
Six concludes. 
2. Earlier Findings 
2.1 Survey Evidence 
Previous work has used similar survey data to analyze the determinants of preferences for 
redistribution. Fong (2001) uses data from a Gallup survey to test whether redistribution pref-
erences result from selfish motives, implying that those who believe in a greater need for help 
to themselves are also the main supporters. She finds a significant effect of income, as a plau-
sible proxy, but this effect is small. There is an independent, strong effect of beliefs about the 
 4 
 
role of effort, luck, and opportunity in life outcomes. Social preferences turn out the best ex-
planation for redistribution preferences.  
Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007) use German reunification as a natural experiment to 
analyze people’s redistribution preferences. Their data come from the Socio-Economic Panel 
(SOEP), and they use region-time interactions to model exogenous variations of preferences. 
They show that East Germans are more in favor of redistribution than West Germans. Alesina 
and Giuliano (2009) use data from different sources, including the World Value Survey, to 
analyze redistribution preferences as well. They include fairness preferences and stated will-
ingness to work hard as control variables, but they do not analyze the reverse causality of 
these variables on redistribution preferences. Their main explanatory variables are individual 
characteristics, and they control for the macroeconomic environment during respondents’ 
youth. They find that historical experiences, cultural factors, and personal histories affect 
preferences for equality.  
Our approach differs from these studies because we are interested in the reciprocal relation-
ship between effort and support for redistribution. Hence, we analyze the feedback between 
support for redistribution and effort, and we control for the macroeconomic environment. Our 
results suggest that modeling effort and redistribution simultaneously is indeed important: 
Support for redistribution affects stated effort choices, but not vice versa. 
2.2 Experimental Evidence 
A number of experimental papers have tested redistribution preferences.  In a first set of pa-
pers, individuals show their willingness at a point of time when their exogenous income is 
known. Hence, “effort” is not manipulated. Durante and Putterman (2009) have groups of 21 
participants. All but one are assigned the equivalent of a 20th fraction of the US income distri-
bution in the year 2000, either randomly or reflecting their performance in a quiz. The ran-
domly selected 21st participant is a “dictator”, deciding on a proportional tax. The proceeds 
are redistributed equally among all group members. The mean tax is close to 50% in the ran-
dom assignment condition, and some 37% in the quiz condition. Tyran and Sausgruber (2006) 
randomly give 2 group members high, 2 medium, or 1 low earnings. Knowing their income, 
participants can vote for redistribution such that the high earners bail out the one low earner. 
Decision is by majority, such that the low and the 2 medium earners can impose redistribution 
on the high earners. Almost all low and most medium earners vote for this scheme, as does a 
third of the high earners. Different from our setting, in both experiments income is assigned, 
not earned, and unrelated to ability . 
In the next experimental step, individuals choose their income risk for a given level of redis-
tribution. Hence, the redistribution choice is not modeled. Specifically Cabrales et al. (2012) 
had participants interact for 50 announced rounds in fixed groups of 9. In the first stage of 
 5 
 
each period, each participant independently decided whether to receive a fixed income or to 
buy a lottery with an expected value above the fixed income, but the risk of ending up with a 
lower payoff. In the second stage, knowing the realizations of the lotteries, and using different 
voting schemes, participants decided whether to redistribute all period income equally. The 
authors find that participants are more likely to vote in favor of redistribution if they have low 
income. In the final rounds, no group combines a willingness to buy lotteries with a high de-
gree of redistribution. Davidovitz and Kroll (2004) have subjects choose between a risk-free 
and a risky asset. Individual choices define the probability with which the risky asset is cho-
sen. If it is, in the baseline all participants have the same realization of the lottery, while in the 
treatment, realizations for all participants are individual (but from the same distribution). 
Higher equality motivates participants to take more risk. These experiments are related to 
ours, in that we use redistribution (exclusively) as a safeguard against risk. But the trade-off 
with effort is not investigated.  
The next step is letting participants decide upon a redistribution scheme before they know in 
which way they will be affected by an income lottery. Yet earnings do not result from effort, 
and they are unrelated to ability.  Selten and Ockenfels (1998) give one or two of three play-
ers a chance to earn 10 Deutsche Mark (DM), while the remaining players earn 0. Before 
earnings are randomly assigned, participants can commit to compensating the losers. On aver-
age, winners are willing to transfer 3 DM, irrespective of the number of losers. This shows a 
willingness to give when earnings (exclusively) depend on luck.  
In the previously reported experiments, ability is not a treatment variable. This changes in 
several papers that focus on redistribution preferences (but do not manipulate effort). It is 
shown that differences in effort are seen as a justification for income differences, whereas 
differences in (innate) ability are not (Schokkaert and Overlaet 1989; Schokkaert and Capeau 
1991; Konow 2000).  Checchi and Filippin (2004) experimentally test the “prospect of up-
ward mobility hypothesis”. They find that less affluent individuals indeed oppose redistribu-
tion, if they have reason to expect that they will become disproportionately more prosperous 
in the future. In contrast to our experimental set up, they do not measure effort. Beckman et 
al. (2004) essentially designed an experiment about distribution, not about redistribution as 
we do. Participants decide in groups of five how to split a pie. The group chooses with ma-
jority between two unequal distributions. In the baseline, when they vote, participants know 
how much each scheme gives them. In the treatment, they decide under the veil of uncertain-
ty. If participants do not know their individual share, they oppose redistribution the more in-
tensely the higher the efficiency loss. This holds no longer true if they decide knowing how 
this will affect them individually. Again, no effort decisions are elicited (further, less closely 
related experiments are reported by Tausch et al. 2010).  
The closest analogue to our approach in the experimental literature is a paper by Frohlich and 
Oppenheimer (1990). Knowing the redistribution scheme, participants had to engage in a real 
effort task: They formed groups of five and had one condition where participants decided on a 
 6 
 
redistribution scheme under the veil of ignorance. In the other condition, it was imposed that 
average income was maximized, but with a floor constraint. The marginal pay rate had con-
siderable returns to scale. When they could choose, almost all groups chose the same scheme 
as was imposed on the other groups. Productivity was not negatively affected by redistribu-
tion, and it actually increased when the scheme was self-selected. In their task, there was con-
siderable room for learning, which could explain these results. Our design differs in that we 
not only test performance conditional on redistribution, but, in a fully symmetric design, also 
redistribution conditional on performance. Moreover, we unpack performance in an effort and 
an ability component. Using the strategy method, we explore a full range of effort and redis-
tribution levels. Finally, our task is unaffected by learning. In earlier papers, Frohlich et al. 
(1987a;  1987b) had shown that the redistribution principle they use in this experiment is the 
most preferred (also see Herne and Suojanen 2004).1 
Essentially, what we contribute to the experimental literature is a direct test of the expectation 
derived from the assumption that tax payers hold social preferences. Such individuals should 
favor (some) redistribution even if they do not individually benefit. Yet this does not guaran-
tee that their effort choices remain unaffected by the resulting decrease in the productivity of 
labor. With our design, we are able to elicit both choices, of effort and of a redistribution lev-
el, from the same individual. 
3. Effort and Preferences for Redistribution:  
Theoretical Motivation 
To motivate our empirical analysis of the determinants of preferences for redistribution and 
effort, we capitalize on a model of effort choice and preferences for redistribution by Persson, 
Tabellini et al. (2000: chapter 6). We enrich the objective function of that model along the 
lines of the canonical model by Fehr and Schmidt (1999), to account for the possibility that 
individuals are inequity averse. We also allow for utility to depend on an exogenous reference 
payoff to capture the sensitivity of redistribution preferences to exogenous (macroeconomic) 
shocks in earning abilities.  
We do not endogenize the political process. This would require fixing the objective function 
of politicians and the fraction of strong and weak individuals in the electorate. We want to say 
only in which ways effort choices react to exogenously imposed redistribution, and in which 
ways tax preferences react to effort choices, given earning ability is heterogeneous.  
                                      
1   Krieger and Traub (2008) also combine survey evidence with an experiment, yet have a different research 
question. They study policy preferences for pension schemes. Neustadt and Zweifel (2010) use contingent 
valuation to elicit preferences for income redistribution in a telephone survey. Klor and Shayo (2010) find 
that social identity tilts votes for a redistribution scheme in favor of the group of which the subjects happen to 
be a member, an issue that we do not consider here. 
 
 7 
 
We proceed in three steps. In the baseline version of the model, there is redistribution, but 
individuals have standard preferences. In the second version, participants are inequity averse 
as in Fehr and Schmidt (1999). In the third version, we modify the model by Fehr and 
Schmidt and make individuals sensitive to deviations from a reference payoff. 
3.1 Standard Preferences 
We are interested in a conflict between individuals of different earning ability with regard to 
work effort and taxes. Earnings of each individual depend on her own labor effort as well as a 
redistributive component. Society (a social planner) redistributes income ex post such that 
pre-tax differences in income are reduced by the tax rate.  
To see the resulting conflict, we study a society of two individuals − one with strong (s) and 
one with weak (w) earning ability. If the strong individual exerts labor effort , she receives a 
corresponding labor income. If the weak individual exerts effort , the payoff is multiplied 
by , reflecting her lower productivity. We thus normalize the strong individual’s ability 
to 1. Consequently,  is given by the ratio of earning abilities. The weaker individual’s total 
utility is given by 
 
(1)
 
where labor income is given by effort , multiplied by ability . The second term is 
transfer income, and the third term gives the non-linear disutility of effort. The government 
transfers income from those with earning above to those with earning below the mean. Hence, 
transfer income is determined as the difference between this individual’s earnings  and the 
mean earnings of society. The tax rate is given by  . Because the weak individual has a 
labor income below the mean, she receives a net transfer. 
By analogy, the strong individual earns 
 
(2)
Because labor income of the strong individual is above the mean, she pays taxes. 
Individuals have two choice variables: they choose their optimal level of labor supply and the 
optimal tax rate. Optimizing with regard to effort, we obtain the following first order condi-
tions: 
 (3)
 8 
 
Strong individuals exert more effort than weak individuals, given . Effort of both indi-
viduals decreases in the tax rate. For the weak individual, higher taxes imply higher transfers. 
Hence, she can keep her income constant with lower effort. For the strong individual, higher 
taxes imply lower net income, hence she prefers to work less. 
The model is linear in taxation, which is why we have corner solutions. Individuals either 
support taxation such that both individuals have the same (gross) income, or they are opposed 
to any redistribution. The first order conditions (FOC) with respect to the tax rate are thus 
given by 
 (4)
where the subscript denotes the individual (s = strong, w = weak), and the superscript denotes 
the choice variable (here: the tax rate τ). As one should expect, individuals hold opposite tax 
preferences. The weak individual supports taxation, while the strong individual is against.  
In sum, the standard model yields three testable propositions: 
Hypothesis 1: Labor supply (effort) increases in individual ability and decreases in 
the tax rate. 
Hypothesis 2: Individual tax preferences depend on individual ability relative to oth-
er members of the community: individuals with high ability are opposed to taxation. 
Individuals with low earning ability prefer a positive tax rate. 
Hypothesis 3: Individual tax preferences and labor supply (effort) are negatively 
correlated at the individual level. 
1.1 Inequity Aversion  
So far, we have assumed that individuals hold standard preferences, and thus care only about 
other individual’s choices or payoff to the extent that it affects their own monetary payoff. In 
the next step, we allow individuals to also care about others and about the distribution of in-
come in a society. Hence, we extend the baseline model to a society of two individuals who 
hold fairness preferences along the lines of Fehr and Schmidt (1999). In contrast to the model 
with standard preferences, we now assume that individuals also care about relative income.  
Now in the policy debate over redistribution, the focus is on income differentials, not on pay-
off differences. The policy debate thus tends to bracket (differences in the) disutility of labor. 
Since we want to make a contribution to our understanding of this policy debate, we modify 
the Fehr/Schmidt model and consider inequity in (gross) income, not in (net) payoff. Because 
we define one individual to be weak, she (potentially) receives disutility only from disadvan-
tageous inequity (“is my own income lower than the income of the stronger individual?”). 
 9 
 
Likewise, the strong individual only (potentially) receives disutility from advantageous ineq-
uity (“is my own income higher than the income of the weaker individual?”).2  
To ease notation, we define (gross) income of the two individuals as: 
 
(5)
(6)
Utility is then given by each individual’s own payoff and a term that captures inequity aver-
sion: 
 (7)
 (8)
Both individuals have lower utility if the payoff for the strong individual is higher than the 
payoff for the weak individual. The sensitivity of individuals towards inequity differs though. 
Fehr and Schmidt make the plausible assumption that : individuals are more sensitive to 
being worse than being better off.   
As before, we find the individually optimal level of labor supply by taking first order condi-
tions and solving: 
 (9)
where optimal choices are indicated by an asterix (*), and superscripts denote that we assume 
(modified) Fehr-Schmidt preferences.  Note a number of implications. For both individuals, 
there is a direct and an indirect effect of inequity aversion. Through the direct effect, the indi-
vidual aims at reducing the inequity by adjusting effort. This can be achieved if the weak in-
dividual increases and the strong individual reduces effort. The indirect effect is conditional 
on the tax rate. The more the weak individual is averse against inequity, the more she reacts to 
a higher tax by reducing effort: the transfer income substitutes for earned income. By contrast, 
the more the strong individual is averse against inequity, the more she supports taxation. Ac-
tually, we can directly read off (9) that the critical  is ½. With , the strong individual 
works harder if the tax is heavier: she increases the amount that can be redistributed. Tax 
preferences follow from first order conditions of (7) and (8) with respect to : 
 
 
(10)
                                      
2  Fehr and Schmidt utility therefore simplifies to a version without max operators. 
 10 
 
The most important implication of (10) concerns the tax preference of the strong individual. 
Provided she is sufficiently averse against inequity (i.e. provided ), she supports a posi-
tive tax rate.  
This leads to an additional hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 4: If strong individuals are sufficiently inequity averse, they too support 
taxation. 
3.3 Aversion Against Income Differing from a Reference Income 
In the policy debate, redistribution is often not only motivated with the desire to reduce in-
come differentials. Policy makers are also sensitive to the idea that everybody should dispose 
of an absolute income sufficient to cover her ordinary needs. Yet, nations differ widely in 
their definition of this level. Some of this variation results from differences in policy prefer-
ences. But the willingness of those who earn more to help those in need also depends on the 
standard of living of the representative household, under ordinary circumstances. We label 
this the “reference payoff”, and one can think about it as the steady state of an economy in the 
absence of business cycle fluctuations. We cover these political attitudes by a second variant 
of the model by Fehr and Schmidt (1999). In this variant, sensitivity to inequity is conditional 
on earning prospects, in comparison with what is characteristic for this population.  
Technically, we capture this additional concern by letting income for all individuals  fluc-
tuate in a symmetric interval  such that actual income is given by 
, with  being the expected value of income, i.e. at , and  being a random 
draw from a uniform distribution over the entire interval. In this variant of the model, inequity 
aversion is the more pronounced the more earning abilities are below the reference payoff. 
Inequity aversion is attenuated the easier it is to earn income, compared with the reference 
income. Hence utility is given by a modified version of (7) and (8), 
 (11) 
 (12) 
Proceeding the same way as in the two previous variants of our model, we get optimal labor 
supply 
 (13)
As expected, with  (13) is identical with (9). Yet if society is in dire circumstances, i.e. 
with , both the direct and the indirect effect of inequity aversion are affected since then  
 11 
 
. The direct effect induces the strong individual to reduce effort, and thereby the ine-
quality. At the same time, her effort is less easily deterred by taxation, since  is more 
likely to be positive. The opposite pattern holds for the weak individual. Compared with (9), 
the direct channel becomes more important. Since , the weak individual increases effort 
even more, to reduce the undesired inequity. However her own efforts are even more strongly 
deterred by the transfer income. 
In similar ways, fluctuation of earning possibilities affects tax preferences. Compared with 
(10), the only change in (14) is, in both equations, the first term, which is now divided by . 
Since , strong individuals are even more likely to support taxation: 
 
 
(14)
This leads to 
Hypothesis 5: Individuals with high earning ability are more likely to support taxa-
tion if they are averse against situations in which individuals with low earning abil-
ity fall below a reference payoff. 
 
With these predictions on the link between effort and redistribution preferences under stand-
ard and social preferences at hand, we now turn to empirical tests on the hypotheses derived. 
We begin with an analysis of survey evidence, in which we explicitly model the simultaneity 
of effort and redistribution preferences. We then turn to experimental lab evidence which inter 
alia helps addressing the endogeneity problem beleaguering survey data. 
4. Redistribution versus Effort: Survey Evidence 
The dependent variables in our empirical model using survey data are preferences for redistri-
bution and effort. We obtain information on these variables from the World Value Survey 
(WVS), which has been used frequently to test preferences for redistribution (see, e.g., 
Alesina and Giuliano 2009). It also contains information about respondents’ preferences to-
wards work and leisure. It is a repeated cross-sectional survey of values and attitudes which 
was conducted in a large number of countries in five waves over a time span of more than 25 
years (1981-2008). We restrict our analysis to OECD countries in order to work with a suffi-
ciently homogenous country sample, while providing heterogeneity with regard to institution-
al structures. Given the structure of the data, we cannot exploit individual-level dynamics, and 
we cannot include individual-specific fixed effects to account for unobserved heterogeneity. 
But we can analyze preferences for redistribution and effort for a large number of individuals 
in many countries and years.  
 12 
 
Our measure for effort ( il ) uses the answer to the question whether an individual considers it 
important to have an opportunity to use initiative at work.3 This question is a 0/1-answer to 
multiple features that are important at the work place. Respondents were free to mention mul-
tiple features. The advantage of this measure is that it asks for the preference to engage in ef-
fort for respondents, both active and non-active in the workplace at the time of the survey. 
The disadvantage is that it does not measure actual effort.  
There is no direct question in the survey asking about preferences for redistribution in terms 
of preferences for taxation. Instead, redistribution preferences (
iτ ) are measured using an-
swers to the question whether incomes should be made more equal. Respondents are asked to 
answer this question on a scale ranging from “1 = Incomes should be made more equal” to 
“10 = We need larger income differences as incentives”.  The question is embedded in a sec-
tion of the survey which asks about respondent’s political preferences. Although the question 
could also be understood as referring to the desirability of high or small income dispersion of 
market incomes, respondents are likely to take it as a statement about governmental redistri-
bution as well. Both variables are scaled such that a higher value indicates stronger prefer-
ences towards effort and redistribution, respectively. Details on the data definitions are given 
in the Appendix. 
Descriptive statistics shown in Graph 2 show that preferences for effort and redistribution are 
not constant over time. According to the World Value Survey, the average proportion of re-
spondents mentioning that it is important to have the opportunity to use initiative at work 
(“effort”) increased from 44% to 55% over the four waves along which the survey was con-
ducted (1981-84 versus 1999-2004). At the same time, support for greater income equality 
strengthened. Across all countries, this would suggest a positive correlation between effort 
and redistribution preferences.  
Because participants in our experiments reported in Section 5 below have been recruited in 
Germany, it is instructive to compare the responses of German respondents in the World Val-
ue Survey to those from other countries. Generally, the opportunity to use initiative at work is 
considered important by about 55% of the respondents in Germany. This share is above-
average and, in contrast to other countries, there is a declining trend over time. At the end of 
the time period, this ratio was similar for Germany as for the other countries. As regards pref-
erences for redistribution, German respondents prefer somewhat higher degrees of redistribu-
tion at the end of the sample period. There has been an increasing trend for this variable in 
Germany unlike in most other countries.  
                                      
3  To check the robustness of our results, we have additionally used answers to the question whether hard 
work brings success (to measure effort preferences), whether higher pay for higher effort is considered 
fair, and whether job security is considered important (to measure redistribution preferences). Qualitative 
results are similar and are available upon request. 
 13 
 
Following previous work by Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007); Alesina and Giuliano 
(2009), we control for the following observed individual-specific characteristics: age and age 
squared, gender, marital status (omitted category: “single or never married”), employment 
status (omitted category: “other”), income group (omitted category: “high income”), and 
church membership. Inter alia, these variables capture individual employment records and the 
probability of becoming unemployed or of being out of work. 
Macroeconomic conditions can have an impact on the preferences for protection through the 
social security system and the incentives to work. GDP growth is used a general proxy for the 
macroeconomic environment. High GDP growth may increase effort, because effort pays off, 
but it may also increase demands for redistribution. We additionally include information on 
top marginal income tax rates as a general measure of the degree of redistribution via the tax 
system.   
4.1 Empirical Model 
Our measure for initiative at work is a dummy, while the preference for redistribution is 
measured on a scale from 0 to 10. For the binary variable, we use a probit model, for the (qua-
si) continuous variable, we use an OLS model, but we have checked the robustness of our 
findings using an ordered probit model. Country fixed effects are included in all regressions.4 
In order to account for the fact that country-year characteristics are identical for all individu-
als in a given year in a given country, we cluster standard errors at the country-year-level. 
4.1.1 Instrumentation Strategy 
Identifying the impact of effort preferences on preferences for redistribution (and vice versa), 
while accounting for the potential endogeneity of the regressors, requires finding appropriate 
instruments. We use the following variables: For effort, we expect a dummy for the respond-
ent being protestant to have a positive impact. This would be in line with the work by Becker 
and Wössmann (2009) who show that, historically, protestantism was associated with eco-
nomic prosperity and with better education. Also, we expect a relation between willingness to 
exert effort and the individual’s perception of and attitude towards earning a living in the 
economy. In an environment where people may safely assume that there is a strong positive 
correlation between higher effort and higher income, they should be more likely to engage in 
effort. We proxy this expectation by the stated willingness to “trust”. On the normative side, 
people should be more inclined to exert high effort if they believe that a high income should 
reflect higher effort. The willingness to engage in high effort and the statement that it is justi-
fiable to accept a bribe (as one source of income unrelated to effort) should therefore be corre-
lated negatively.  
                                      
4  Note that the macrovariables and time-country fixed effects cannot be included simultaneously.  
 14 
 
As regards preferences for redistribution, we have three main variables which are expected to 
affect only this variable, but not effort choices. The first is measured at the individual level, 
and it describes the characteristics of the neighborhood. Due to the fixed costs of moving, 
these characteristics can be considered exogenous for the individual in the short to medium 
run. When asked about the characteristics of their neighborhood, respondents can answer 
whether neighbors have a different race or a different religion, whether they are drug addicts, 
alcoholics, whether they belong to a militant minority, or whether they have a criminal record. 
We create a new variable which equals one if one of these conditions is fulfilled. The intuition 
is that a more homogenous and less adverse neighborhood increases the probability that peo-
ple favor redistribution. We expect a negative impact.  
The second variable that should affect preferences for redistribution (but not effort) measures 
the tightness of employment protection legislation. It is an index running from 1 to 5, and a 
higher value indicates stricter employment protection legislation. Redistribution preferences 
are influenced by living in a context where redistribution is more generous. We would thus 
expect to find a positive link between individual preferences for redistribution and employ-
ment protection legislation.  
Finally, high growth volatility indicates that macroeconomic risks are high. We therefore ex-
pect this variable to have a positive effect on redistribution preferences. GDP growth volatili-
ty is calculated as the standard deviation of GDP growth over a five year period. 
Ultimately, the data need to tell whether the above variables are suitable instruments. Table 1 
thus shows the results for single equation models using the “opportunity to use initiative at 
work” and preferences for a more equal allocation of income as the dependent variables. We 
report the results of instrumental variable regressions and additionally show the first-stage 
regression results. The signs for the instruments are in line with expectations: People who 
trust more and who are protestant are more likely to answer that it is important to use initia-
tive at work; people who find it acceptable to take bribes and who value leisure more do less 
so. Preferences for greater redistribution are negatively correlated with adverse conditions in 
the neighborhood and positively correlated with employment protection legislation and 
growth volatility. 
4.1.2 Regression Results 
Theory suggests that preferences for redistribution and effort are negatively correlated at the 
individual level. Our results confirm this prior, but they also show that this is no two-way cor-
relation (Table 1): The (instrumented) preference for redistribution has a negative impact on 
effort, and this effect becomes stronger when moving from (unreported) probit regressions to 
IV estimates. But the (instrumented) effort measure – which is negative and significant in a 
simple OLS model – does not have a significant impact on preferences for redistribution. 
Causality thus seems to run from redistribution preferences to effort, but not vice versa. 
 15 
 
Our empirical model explains about 5% of the individual effort and about 8% of the redistri-
bution preferences, which is similar to other work in the field. In Alesina and Giuliano (2009), 
for instance, the R² in models for redistribution preferences ranges from 0.09-0.15. The model 
is in line with our theoretical priors in the sense that respondents with medium or low incomes 
are less likely to answer that it is important to use initiative at work, and are more in favor of 
redistribution. Also, the finding that those who are self-employed are consistently less in fa-
vor of redistribution than non-self-employed persons is in line with expectations, given that 
the self-employed can be expected to be more risk-taking and engage in higher effort.5 Higher 
growth has a positive impact on preferences for redistribution and lowers effort. Finally, pref-
erences for redistribution and the top marginal tax rate at the country level are positively cor-
related, as expected. 
We have run a couple of tests checking the robustness of our results with regard to the specif-
ic choice of the IV model. For the model reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 1, the quali-
tative results are robust with regard to estimating the model using 2SLS or GMM and with 
regard to different options for clustering the errors. The Durbin-Hausman-Wu test rejects that 
“effort” is endogenous, but this result is somewhat sensitive to the specific choice of instru-
ments. The Hansen Test is insignificant, which implies that the overidentification restriction is 
valid. However, when additionally including the instruments which we conjecture to be im-
portant for redistribution preferences, these are significant as well: employment protection 
legislation has a negative and significant impact on effort; the heterogeneity of the neighbor-
hood has a positive impact. Adding these variables causes the Hansen Test to become signifi-
cant, though, implying that in this specification the overidentification restriction is not valid. 
Although we should not trust this specification too much, this shows the problem to find in-
struments affecting one variable only.  
The ivprobit command provides less flexibility with regard to testing the quality of the 
instruments. The first main difference to the redistribution equation is that effort has a nega-
tive and significant impact in the regular probit model and in different versions of the IV 
models. Moving from probit to an IV-probit estimator, the estimated coefficient increases and 
the standard error decreases, suggesting that the probit estimator is indeed biased. Moreover, 
the correlation coefficient measuring whether the error terms of the first and the second stage 
regression are correlated is highly significant, indicating that preferences for redistribution are 
endogenous. Hence, our model suggests that preferences for redistribution have a negative 
impact on effort, but it is difficult to find instruments which affect one, but not the other. 
                                      
5  Results for the remaining individual-specific variables are largely in line with priors and with previous 
empirical evidence: men are generally less in favor of redistribution than women, but gender has no im-
pact on effort preferences; age has a non-linear impact; unemployment status (after controlling for in-
come) has no impact on redistribution preferences or effort; family status has no important impact on re-
distribution preferences; and church members put less emphasis on redistribution but higher emphasis on 
own initiative. 
 16 
 
4.2 Simultaneous Equation Model 
So far, we have included preferences for redistribution in the equation for effort preferences, 
and vice versa, but we have not taken into account that the two might be jointly determined at 
the individual level. Solving the problem that standard estimates of simultaneous equation 
models are biased and inconsistent would be straightforward if we were to deal with two con-
tinuous variables. Such systems can be consistently and efficiently estimated using three-stage 
least squares methods (Zellner and Theil 1962). However, because one of our main dependent 
variables (the opportunity of using initiative in a job) is a dichotomous variable, we need a 
system estimator which takes this into account. 
We employ an instrumental variables estimation using the procedure suggested by Maddala 
(1983); Keshk (2003) for systems where one of the endogenous variables is dichotomous. 
Using a two-stage procedure, we create instruments for the endogenous variables, and we 
substitute them for the endogenous counterparts in the structural equations of interest.  
Let preferences for redistribution *itit ττ = be a fully observed variable, and effort preferences 
be given by 1=itl  if 0
* >itl  and 0=itl otherwise.
6 We estimate a two-stage probit least 
squares (2SPLS) model. In the first step, the following reduced-form equations are estimated: 
ititit v ,11' +Π= Xτ         (7a) 
ititit vl ,22
** ' +Π= X         (7b), 
where i is a country index and t denotes time. Note that it,1X  is a composite vector which in-
cludes all exogenous variables included in the first structural equation (8a) ( it,1X ) and in the 
second structural equation (8b) ( it,2X ). Equation (7a) is estimated using OLS, and equation 
(7b) is estimated using a probit model to obtain the (K x 1)-vector of parameter coefficients 
1'Πˆ  and 2'Πˆ . The fitted values ititit X,1'ˆˆ Π=τ  and itititl X,2
** 'ˆˆ Π=  from these equations are used 
as regressors for the second stage regressions. The covariates itX include all exogenous re-
gressors from both equations in the simultaneous equations model.  
Panel (a) of Table 2 shows the results for the first stage regressions, focusing on the variables 
used as instruments in Table 1. The remaining regressors are included in the model, but are 
not shown to save space. Qualitatively, the results are the same as before, but they show the 
problem pointed out earlier: while there are a couple of variables affecting effort, but not 
preferences, for redistribution, the reverse does not hold.  
Step two involves estimating the structural equations of interest: 
itititit l ,1,11
**
1
* ˆ εβγτ ++= X        (8a) 
                                      
6   The presentation of the empirical model follows Keshk (2003). 
 17 
 
ititititl ,2,22
*
2
**
, ˆ εβτγ ++= X        (8b), 
where it.1X  and it,2X  are the exogenous explanatory variables affecting effort and redistribu-
tion preferences, respectively. Equation (8a) is estimated using OLS, and equation (8b) is es-
timated using a probit model. Estimation needs to take into account that the standard errors 
are biased, and (Keshk 2003) derives the corresponding adjustment factors. We implement 
this procedure by invoking the procedure cdsimeq in Stata. The model would not be identi-
fied if the same set of variables was included in vectors it.1X  and it,2X .   
In terms of the feedback between effort and redistribution, Table 2 confirms the main conclu-
sion from Table 1: redistribution preferences have a negative and significant impact on effort, 
but not vice versa. It is also interesting to note that, while moving from a single-equation OLS 
(or probit) to an IV model had virtually no impact on the estimates for the remaining control 
variables, this is not the case when moving to a system estimation. Most importantly, the im-
pact of the income level and self-employment status on initiative becomes insignificant when 
modeling effort and redistribution jointly. 
In sum, from our analysis of survey data we can draw the following conclusions: 
o Hypothesis 1 states that effort increases in individual ability and decreases in the tax 
rate. One proxy for individual ability is the actual income level. In the single-equation 
model, we indeed find a positive correlation between income and the willingness to 
engage in effort. Yet, once we simultaneously model effort and redistribution prefer-
ences, low- and middle-income respondents do not think any less than more affluent 
respondents that effort at work pays off for them. In this sense, Hypothesis 1 is not 
confirmed by the data, and we also find no significant impact of the marginal tax rate. 
o Hypothesis 2 states that individuals with low individual ability prefer higher tax rates. 
This hypothesis is supported by our finding that low-income, middle-income, and un-
employed respondents are more likely to favor redistribution.  
o Hypothesis 3 states that effort and redistribution preferences are negatively correlated 
at the individual level. Redistribution preferences indeed have a negative impact on 
the opportunity to use initiative at work, but not vice versa. One implication of this 
finding is that increased incentives to engage in effort must not necessarily come at the 
expense of less redistribution. 
5. Redistribution versus Effort: Experimental Evidence 
The survey data have allowed estimating the relationship between effort (li) and 
tax/redistribution preferences (τi) in a world where ability is heterogeneous. Yet, there are 
several difficulties with the survey data. First, our ability to isolate the feedback between the 
 18 
 
two variables which are endogenously chosen by each individual hinges on the quality of the 
instruments. Second, individual real-world choices might differ from answers given in an in-
terview. Third, the interview questions have been designed without having our research ques-
tions in mind. Fourth with the survey data, we cannot address Hypothesis 4 because we do not 
have information on individuals’ social preferences. We cannot address Hypothesis 5 because 
the data is cross-sectional. We do not observe at the individual level how tax preferences react 
to a negative change in the general economic climate. For all these reasons, we complement 
our analysis with experimental evidence. 
5.1 Design 
In the lab, we cannot standardize or induce those determinants of ability that a participant has 
acquired at birth or during her education. But we can measure this ability and control for it. 
And we can induce differences in the ability to solve specific tasks. Moreover, we can make 
sure that participants act in groups, the heterogeneity of which we control. The general set up 
of our joint effort-and-redistribution experiment is given in Tables 3a-3c. The task is fully 
computerized. Participants earn a fixed piece rate for each problem they solve correctly. 
To measure ability and to induce effort , we use a task developed by (Mazar et al. 2008). In 
tables of different size, participants are asked to find the one pair of numbers that add up to 
10, as in Table 3a. The experiment then proceeds in three steps, eliciting effort and redistribu-
tion choices by inducing the respective other parameter. 
5.1.1 Phase 1: Measuring Ability 
In the first phase of the experiment, we measure individual ability. Participants see problems 
as in Table 3a. They see one problem at a time on a computer screen and have to tick the two 
cells that add up to 10 with the mouse. In each problem only two cells match in this way. Par-
ticipants earn money only if the answer is correct. Participants have announced 10 minutes to 
solve as many problems as they can. Problems are presented in the sequence of easy (2x2 ta-
bles), ordinary (3x3 tables), and difficult (4x4 tables) problems. The first phase gives us an 
individual-specific measure of ability, i.e., the number of problems a participant has solved 
correctly. Moreover, it gives participants a chance to familiarize themselves with the task so 
that they can make meaningful choices in the later parts of the experiment.  
5.1.2 Phase 2: Elicit Redistribution Preferences 
In the second phase, we elicit redistribution preferences by asking participants to fill in Ta-
ble 3b. We randomly compose groups of four. Participants know that each group has one 
member from each of the ability quartiles. They are reminded of their own performance in the 
 19 
 
first phase. They further learn to which of the four ability classes they belong, and they are 
informed about the average performance of all four members of their group in the first phase.  
The second phase measures redistribution preferences. Specifically, using the strategy method 
(Selten 1967), we ask participants to decide for each level of effort and for each difficulty of 
the task how much redistribution they desire. To that end, in each cell, each participant enters 
a percentage. Participants are told that, at the end of the experiment, one of these cells will 
randomly be determined to be payoff-relevant. Participants know they will have to exert the 
assigned effort in the cell singled out at the end of the experiment if they do not want to lose 
their entire income from the experiment. Redistribution is financed from the proceeds of a tax 
that is proportional to income. Effort is fixed in percent of the number of problems this partic-
ipant has correctly solved in the first phase in the range [30%, 120%], in steps of 10%.  To 
illustrate: if the individual had solved 10 problems correctly in phase 1, and the 60% level is 
randomly selected to be payoff-relevant, she has to solve 6 problems correctly. 
We have chosen these parameters to have sufficient variance in our explanatory variable and 
to reflect a macro-environment that makes earning the same amount of money as before easier 
(think of growth effects) or more difficult (think of technical progress making it more difficult 
to earn money in some professions). The tax rate and thereby the size of the lump-sum trans-
fer is determined by the median of the statements by the four group members. Technically, for 
each cell we use the mean between the second and the third highest percentage, in the respec-
tive group. Through randomly determining the difficulty of the task, we induce a handicap. 
Within the framework of the theoretical model, the random choice of table size has the inter-
pretation of an exogenous shock that shifts mean ability upwards (if size is 2x2,  in the 
model) or downwards (if size is 4x4,  in the model).  
5.1.2 Phase 3: Elicit Effort Preferences 
In the third phase, we elicit effort preferences by asking participants to fill in Table 3c. Using 
the same task and the same procedure, we fix a tax rate. Again, each group member receives a 
quarter of total tax revenue, irrespective of her own effort and income. We now vary tax rates 
in the range [0%, 45%], in steps of 5%, where the upper limit is intended to reflect marginal 
tax rates observed in the real world. We now ask participants to commit to a number of prob-
lems they are prepared to solve (correctly) for each tax rate and difficulty of the task (with the 
maximum fixed at 50 problems). Feedback from redistribution choices is withheld until all 
participants have also taken effort choices, which is why the order in which participants have 
taken these decisions cannot play a role. Again, participants are informed that, after they have 
taken all choices, the computer will randomly determine one of the cells to be payoff-relevant. 
For this cell, participants are requested to exert the effort to which they have committed. All 
participants did. 
 20 
 
Note that our design directly matches the theoretical model. The number of problems a partic-
ipant solves in the first part of the experiment informs us about ability acquired by birth and 
education. This allows us to measure . In the second part of the experiment, we exogenous-
ly impose effort li. In the third part of the experiment, we manipulate the tax rate τ.  
5.1.3 Conducting the Experiment 
The experiment was conducted at the Bonn EconLab in December 2011. 96 student subjects 
of various majors (55.2% female) were invited using the Online Recruitment System for Eco-
nomic Experiments (ORSEE) (Greiner 2004). The experiment was fully computerized, using 
the Zurich Toolbox for Readymade Economic Experiments (zTree) (Fischbacher 2007).  With 
a series of computerized control questions, we made sure that all participants understood the 
tasks. The experiment lasted approximately 2 hours. On average, participants needed 14 
minutes 51 seconds to complete the tasks resulting from their choices in Parts 2 and 3. The 
first participant left after 1 minute 16 seconds (because this participant had to solve only a 
very small number of easy tasks). The last participant left after 49 minutes 28 seconds (be-
cause this participant had chosen to solve the maximum of 50 problems in the third part of the 
experiment, and tasks were taken from 4x4 cells in both parts of the experiment). Participants 
received a piece rate of 40 Cents per problem solved. On average they earned 26.36 € (ap-
proximately 34.14 US-$), range [9.75, 52.64 €]. 
5.2 Descriptive Statistics 
As expected, participants’ ability was quite heterogeneous. In the first part, during 10 
minutes, they solved between 5 and 44 problems (mean: 23.02, median 22). The mean in the 
lowest class (quartile) was 12.96, in the second class 19.79, in the third class 25.42, and in the 
best class 33.92. 
Redistribution votes, and hence redistribution preferences, were strongly left-skewed 
(Graph 3a). 23 of all 96 participants did not want any redistribution. 15 participants wanted on 
average at least 5% redistribution. Only 4 participants wanted on average 50% or more redis-
tribution. By contrast, effort choices were spread out over the entire range, with peaks at all 
prominent numbers (Graph 3b). Graph 3c replicates the analysis from the World Value Sur-
vey, but now uses incentivized choices, rather than mere answers to survey questions. As one 
sees, very high redistribution preferences (choices) are associated with low effort preferences, 
and vice versa. Ability (graphically displayed by membership in one of the four ability clas-
ses) has a strong effect on effort preferences, but is not systematically associated with redis-
tribution preferences.  
While this is interesting in its own right, in the following we focus on the effect of exogenous-
ly manipulated effort which participants knew they would have to actually exert at the end of 
 21 
 
the experiment. This gives us both a cleaner and a more fine-grained measure of effort as a 
determinant of redistribution preferences.  
5.3 Regression Results 
We revert to regression analysis because this gives us the possibility to control for confound-
ing factors. We have a panel dataset with 30 effort choices, with 10 different levels of im-
posed effort, and three different handicaps for each participant. Moreover, when they make 
effort choices, participants are aware of the mean ability of their group, they know to which 
ability class they belong, that one participant from each quartile of the distribution is in their 
group, and that redistribution will take place within their specific group. For all these reasons, 
choices of individuals are nested within groups.  
We match the data-generating process by a mixed effects model, with a separate error term 
for individuals, and another error term for groups. This statistical model assumes that all error 
terms are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables. We test this assumption with a Haus-
man test that compares coefficients from the mixed-effects model with an alternative model 
that has individual fixed effects only.7 The test never turns out to be significant. This justifies 
using the more efficient random effects model. It also allows us to estimate coefficients for 
explanatory variables that do not vary within participants.  
5.3.1 Explaining Effort Choices 
Table 4 shows the determinants of effort choices. We find a significant effect of ability 
throughout, in the expected direction. The more problems a participant has solved in the first 
phase, the more problems she is also willing to solve in the third phase, despite the fact that 
this may involve redistribution. This willingness is not conditional on the mean effort level in 
the group (model 2). Participants want to solve more problems if tasks are easy and less prob-
lems if tasks are difficult (model 4). Even conditional on all these explanatory variables, the 
higher the imposed degree of redistribution, the lower the willingness to exert effort (model 
5). We thus fully support Hypothesis 1. The dampening effect of redistribution on effort, 
however, is not dramatic. The maximum redistribution rate is 0.45. Even for that rate, the sta-
tistical model predicts a reduction of effort only from about 23 to 18 problems, i.e., a reduc-
tion by 21% (model 5).  
                                      
7   Because individuals are nested in groups, these fixed effects automatically capture any non-random ef-
fects at the group level. For the first three models, we do not have a “time”-variant regressor, which is 
why we cannot perform the Hausman test. To make the test possible, we rerun these models and addition-
ally control for task difficulty, which is the equivalent of time in our data-generating process. 
 22 
 
5.3.2 Explaining Redistribution Choices 
When analyzing redistribution choices, as is done in Table 5, we get a somewhat different 
picture. 8  We find a significantly weaker preference for redistribution if earning money is 
easy, and a significantly stronger preference for redistribution if earning money is difficult 
(model 4). Recall that effort is imposed as a percentage of the problems this participant has 
correctly solved in phase 1. This variable has a significant positive effect (model 5). If every-
body has to exert higher effort, the willingness to redistribute increases. The prospect of more 
time for leisure does not explain redistribution choices (model 6). Recall that, in the World 
Value Survey, we had not found a significant effect of effort preferences on redistribution 
preferences. Here we find an effect of imposed effort, but it is not negative (as in the theoreti-
cal model), but positive. The two significant effects both suggest: if the community is in dire 
circumstances, all stand together and help each other; if all can easily fend for themselves, all 
see much less urge for ex post corrections of income through redistribution. This stands in 
clear contradiction to a model with standard preferences (Hypothesis 3). By contrast, our data 
directly support Hypothesis 5:  On average, individuals with strong earning ability care for 
individuals with weaker earning ability falling below a reference payoff. 
We, finally, consider the effect of ability on redistribution preferences. In none of the linear 
mixed effects models (models 1-6) do we find a significant effect. This changes only with a 
different choice of functional form. In model 7, we estimate a random effects Tobit model, 
with censoring from below.9 We now find the significant negative effect predicted by the the-
oretical model: the more a participant outperformed the remaining members of her group in 
the first phase, the less she is in favor of redistribution, and vice versa. The Tobit model as-
sumes that some of those participants who have voted for zero redistribution actually would 
have preferred a negative redistribution rate. This is intuitive. Such participants care about 
relative payoffs, and would want society to pay a premium to high performers. With this qual-
ification, we support Hypothesis 2. 
6. Concluding Remarks 
The global financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis have had severe repercus-
sions on the real economy. They have also triggered policy discussions on the trade off be-
tween redistribution and growth. On the one hand, the crises have shown the fragility of in-
surance systems relying on financial markets, as private investors have suffered substantial 
losses. The ability of governments to shield their electorates from the perils of international 
markets has been called into question. Many workers have experienced increased labor mar-
                                      
8  Because we did not allow participants to choose more than 50 problems, we also re-estimated all models 
as random effects Tobit models, with upper censoring. Coefficients and significance levels are very simi-
lar. These additional estimates are available from the authors upon request. 
9  Because there is no generally acknowledged mixed-effects Tobit estimator, we add group fixed effects to 
the model with a participant random effect. 
 23 
 
ket risks, and they demand greater protection by their government. On the other hand, gov-
ernments will have little room for maneuver as public households have to deal with the in-
creasing burden of public debt. Hence, a key question is how policymakers can align redis-
tributive policies and fiscal consolidation without jeopardizing future economic growth. 
The trade off between redistribution and growth is a core macroeconomic policy question. We 
investigate this question from the perspective of individual preferences by analyzing the link 
between individual preferences for effort and redistribution. Our empirical evidence using 
survey and experimental data is motivated by a simple theoretical framework using both, 
standard preferences and preferences incorporating inequity aversion. If all individuals hold 
standard preferences, the model predicts that those who have high ability will exert more ef-
fort and will be opposed to (more) redistribution. Hence, policies which increase redistribu-
tion have negative implications for effort, and those exerting high effort are in favor of little 
redistribution. If individuals are averse against inequity, however, results are less clear cut, 
and stronger individuals might in fact favor higher levels of redistribution. Our model sug-
gests that this is particularly likely if they are averse against weaker individuals’ income fall-
ing below what they had in the past and thus a reference payoff.  
We have tested the implications of this model using survey and experimental data, and our 
research has three main findings.  
First, both, in the survey and in the lab, we support the predicted negative effect of redistribu-
tion on effort. The more income is redistributed, i.e., the higher the tax rate, and the higher the 
degree of redistribution financed from this tax, the more the willingness to exert effort de-
clines.  
Second, in the survey data, we also find clear support for the negative relationship between 
ability and redistribution preferences predicted by the model. The more money a person is 
able to earn, the less she favors redistribution. Surprisingly, when we elicit actual redistribu-
tion choices in the lab, we find the same relationship only if we use a Tobit model that allows 
for the possibility of society even paying a premium for high performance. 
Third, both in the survey and in the lab, we qualify the link between redistribution and effort 
preferences expected by a model with standard preferences. If we simultaneously estimate the 
effect of effort preferences on redistribution preferences, and vice versa, we still find the neg-
ative effect of redistribution on effort, but we no longer find a negative effect of effort on re-
distribution. In the lab, we find a significant effect, but it even is positive. If the design of the 
experiment forces (all) participants to exert high effort, on average even those with high abil-
ity are in favor of more redistribution. The effect is even more pronounced if an exogenous 
shock makes earning money more difficult for everybody. This suggests that the standard the-
oretical model misses a “solidarity” motive. Experimental participants apparently do see re-
 24 
 
distribution less as an opportunity for equalizing income, and more as a technology for giving 
everybody a “fair” minimum income if the economy is in dire circumstances.  
Of course, strictly speaking, the results of our empirical exercises cannot easily be transferred 
outside the boundaries of our survey and experimental set-ups. Drawing policy lessons from 
the survey data is subject to changes in the environment and thus to the Lucas critique, and 
experiments never capture all effects that might matter in reality. Still, we believe that our 
results could be potentially relevant for the current policy debate in the following sense: In the 
past five years since the outbreak of the world financial crisis, a series of severe shocks has hit 
the world economy. The labor market responses to this shock will depend on preferences for 
redistribution.  Our data suggests that even many of those with high earning ability, and of 
those who currently exert high effort, would be in support of helping those who have been hit 
by the crisis. Yet, if the degree of protection increases, this risks having a negative feedback 
effect on effort and growth.  
Through this channel, in the long run, more redistribution may even be bad for growth and 
fairness. For the higher the redistributive burden, the smaller the fraction of income an indi-
vidual may influence by working harder. If income is at least partly determined by luck, the 
portion of income inequality resulting from luck becomes the more important the less effort 
matters (Alesina and Giuliano 2009). The resulting distribution of incomes would be consid-
ered less “fair”. Both our survey and our lab evidence point to an additional, more direct 
channel. If there is more redistribution, the willingness to exert effort decreases. The degree of 
redistribution directly and negatively affects effort preferences. This poses a hard choice for 
policy makers. When the decision in favor of more redistribution has to be taken, there might 
be little opposition, if not positive support even by those with a high contemporaneous prefer-
ence for effort. Yet, later on, the economy will suffer from the fact that the higher burden of 
redistribution dampens the willingness to exert more effort. In this sense, policy preferences 
can be considered short-sighted. The electorate seems to suffer from inconsistency in its pref-
erences for redistribution. 
 25 
 
7. Literature 
Alesina, Alberto and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln (2007). "Good-bye Lenin (or not?). The Effect 
of Communism on People's Preferences." The American Economic Review 97(4): 
1507-1528. 
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano (2009). "Preferences for Redistribution." NBER Working 
Paper. 
Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Wössmann (2009). "Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital 
Theory of Protestant Economic History." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 531-
596. 
Beckman, Steven R., John P. Formby and James W. Smith (2004). "Efficiency, Equity and 
Democracy. Experimental Evidence on Okun's Leaky Bucket." Research on Economic 
Inequality 11: 17-42. 
Cabrales, Antonio, Rosemarie Nagel and José V. Rodriguez Mora (2012). "It is Hobbes, not 
Rousseau. An Experiment on Voting and Redistribution." Experimental Economics 15: 
***. 
Checchi, Daniele and Antonio Filippin (2004). "An Experimental Study of the POUM Hy-
pothesis." Research on Economic Inequality 11: 115-136. 
Davidovitz, Liema and Yoram Kroll (2004). "On the Attitude Towards Inequality." Research 
on Economic Inequality 11: 137-147. 
Durante, Ruben and Louis Putterman (2009). Preferences for Redistribution and Perception of 
Fairness. An Experimental Study  
Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt (1999). "A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Coopera-
tion." Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 817-868. 
Fischbacher, Urs (2007). "z-Tree. Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Experiments." 
Experimental Economics 10: 171-178. 
Fong, Christina M. (2001). "Social Preferences, Self-interest, and the Demand for Redistribu-
tion." Journal of Public Economics 82(2): 225-246. 
Frohlich, Norman and Joe Oppenheimer (1990). "Choosing Justice in Experimental Democra-
cies with Production." The American Political Science Review 84(2): 461-477. 
Frohlich, Norman, Joe Oppenheimer and Cheryl L. Eavey (1987a). "Choices of Principles of 
Distributive Justice in Experimental Groups." American Journal of Political Science 
31(3): 606-636. 
 26 
 
Frohlich, Norman, Joe Oppenheimer and Cheryl L. Eavey (1987b). "Laboratory Results on 
Rawls's Distributive Justice." British Journal of Political Science 17(01): 1-21. 
Greiner, Ben (2004). An Online Recruiting System for Economic Experiments. Forschung 
und wissenschaftliches Rechnen 2003. K. Kremer and V. Macho. Göttingen: 79-93. 
Herne, Kaisa and Maria Suojanen (2004). "The Role of Information in Choices over Income 
Distributions." Journal of Conflict Resolution 48(2): 173. 
Keshk, Omar M.G. (2003). "CDSIMEQ. A Program to Implement Two-stage Probit Least 
Squares." The Stata Journal 3(2): 1–11. 
Klor, Esteban and Moses Shayo (2010). "Social Identity and Preferences Over Redistribu-
tion." Journal of Public Economics 94: 269-278. 
Konow, James (2000). "Fair Shares. Accountability and Cognitive Dissonance in Allocation 
Decisions." American Economic Review 90(4): 1072-1091. 
Krieger, Tim and Stefan Traub (2008). Back to Bismarck? Shifting Preferences for Intragen-
erational Redistribution in OECD Pension Systems  http://www.uni-
graz.at/socialpolitik/ papers/Krieger.pdf. 
Maddala, Gangadharrao Soundalyarao (1983). Limited-dependent and Qualitative Variables 
in Econometrics, Cambridge Univ Pr. 
Mazar, Nina, On Amir and Dan Ariely (2008). "The Dishonesty of Honest People. A Theory 
of Self-Concept Maintenance." Journal of Marketing Research 45(6): 633-644. 
Neustadt, Ilja and Peter Zweifel (2010). Economic Well-Being, Social Mobility, and Prefer-
ences for Income Redistribution. Evidence from a Discrete Choice Experiment  
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (2011). Divided We Stand. Why 
Inequality Keeps Rising. Paris, OECD. 
Persson, Torsten, Guido Tabellini and Isabelle Brocas (2000). Political Economics, MIT 
press. 
Schokkaert, Erik and Bart Capeau (1991). "Interindividual Differences in Opinions about Dis-
tributive Justice." Kyklos 44(3): 325-345. 
Schokkaert, Erik and Bruno Overlaet (1989). "Moral Intuitions and Economic Models of Dis-
tributive Justice." Social Choice and Welfare 6(1): 19-31. 
 27 
 
Selten, Reinhard (1967). Die Strategiemethode zur Erforschung des eingeschränkt rationalen 
Verhaltens im Rahmen eines Oligopolexperiments. Beiträge zur experimentellen 
Wirtschaftsforschung. E. Sauermann. Tübingen, Mohr: 136-168. 
Selten, Reinhard and Axel Ockenfels (1998). "An Experimental Solidarity Game." Journal of 
Economic Behavior & Organization 34(4): 517-539. 
Tausch, Franziska, Jan Potters and Arno Riedl (2010). Preferences for Redistribution and 
Pensions. What Can We Learn from Experiments? 
 http://www.cesifo.de/DocCIDL/cesifo1_wp3156.pdf. 
Tyran, Jean-Robert and Rupert Sausgruber (2006). "A Little Fairness May Induce a Lot of 
Redistribution in Democracy." European Economic Review 50(2): 469-485. 
Zellner, Arnold and H. Theil (1962). "Three-stage Least Squares. Simultaneous Estimation of 
Simultaneous Equations." Econometrica 30(1): 54-78. 
 
 
 
 
 28 
 
8. Appendix 
8.1 World Value Survey 
OECD countries only. Variables  “v” refer to most recent waves. 
1. Proxy for Effort 
 “Opportunity to use initiative” (c016) 
Here are some more aspects of a job that people say are important. Please look at them and 
tell me which ones you personally think are important in a job? “An opportunity to use initia-
tive” 
0 'Not mentioned', 1 'Mentioned ' 
2. Preferences for Redistribution 
  “Incomes should be made more equal” (e035, v116)   
1 =  incomes should be made more equal, …, 10 = we need larger income differences  
Re-scaled such that 10 =  incomes should be made more equal, …, 1 = we need larger income 
differences 
Years: 1989, 1990, 1991, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2005, 2006, 2007, 
2008 
Further individual-specific variables: 
Age and age squared (x003, v237), Church membership (a065, a098, v24), Employment sta-
tus (x028, v241) (omitted category: “other”), Gender (x001, v235), Income group (x047r, 
v253) (omitted category: “high income”), Justifiable to accept a bribe (f117), Leisure is im-
portant (a003), Marital status (x007, v55) (omitted category: “single or never married”), 
Neighbors are drinkers (a126), Neighbors are drug addicts (a131), Neighbors belong to a mil-
itant minority (a137), Neighbors have a criminal record (a124), Neighbors have a different 
race (a125), Neighbors have a different religion (a135), People can be trusted (a165), 
Protestant (f025 = 62) 
1.2 Country-Level Variables 
GDP growth and volatility 
World Bank, World Development Indicators, GDP growth volatility is the moving-average 
standard deviation of GDP growth 
Labor market regulations 
Data have been compiled by Bassanini and Duval (2006) and are available online. We use the 
following indicators: (i) Benefit replacement rates: percentage of average before tax earnings 
 29 
 
covered through unemployment and social insurance programs. (ii) Employment protection 
legislation (EPL): Index of tightness of employment protection legislation where a higher 
value indicates tighter legislation. 
Top marginal tax rates 
Personal income top marginal tax rates. 
Sources: Data before 2000 has been taken from Source: World Tax Database, Office of Tax 
Policy Research.  Downloaded from http://www.wtdb.org/index.html on July 16, 2002; data 
after 2000 are taken from the OECD tax database, www.oecd.org/ctp/taxdatabase 
Social Security 
Social security contributions as percentage of GDP. Missing data have been linearly extrapo-
lated. 
Sources: OECD (2008) Revenue Statistics 1965-2007, downloaded from the OECD tax data-
base, www.oecd.org/ctp/taxdatabase 
 
 30 
 
Summary Statistics 
This Table shows the summary statistics for the variables used in the regressions. The number of observations 
differs from those reported in the following Tables because not all questions have been asked in all countries in 
all survey waves. 
Variable Observations Mean Std. dev. Minimum Maximum 
Age 139,583 43.390 17.096 15.000 101.000
Age squared (/10³) 139,583 2.175 1.631 0.225 10.201
Children (0/1) 129,403 0.755 0.430 0.000 1.000
Church member (0/1) 131,541 0.235 0.424 0.000 1.000
Divorced (0/1) 140,857 0.044 0.205 0.000 1.000
Full time (0/1) 137,647 0.410 0.492 0.000 1.000
GDP growth (annual %) 140,254 2.323 3.827 -14.570 11.350
GDP volatility (%) 114,306 1.845 1.491 0.211 8.808
Hard work brings success 75,285 6.432 2.698 1.000 10.000
Higher pay for higher effort considered unfair 117,248 0.194 0.395 0.000 1.000
House wife (0/1) 137,647 0.140 0.347 0.000 1.000
Incomes should be made more equal 104,863 5.395 2.861 1.000 10.000
Log trade share 138,463 3.847 0.497 2.606 5.249
Low income (0/1) 120,785 0.348 0.476 0.000 1.000
Male (0/1) 142,229 0.477 0.499 0.000 1.000
Married (0/1) 140,857 0.643 0.479 0.000 1.000
Medium income (0/1) 120,785 0.375 0.484 0.000 1.000
Part time (0/1) 137,647 0.081 0.272 0.000 1.000
Retired (0/1) 137,647 0.170 0.376 0.000 1.000
Self-employed (0/1) 137,647 0.072 0.259 0.000 1.000
Separated (0/1) 140,857 0.015 0.122 0.000 1.000
Use initiative at work (0/1) 124,094 0.500 0.500 0.000 1.000
Student (0/1) 137,647 0.058 0.234 0.000 1.000
Top marginal tax rate in respondent’s country 132,933 0.465 0.143 0.115 0.930
Unemployed (0/1) 137,647 0.054 0.226 0.000 1.000
Union member (0/1) 127,691 0.172 0.377 0.000 1.000
Widowed (0/1) 140,857 0.072 0.258 0.000 1.000
 
 31 
 
Table 1: Determinants of Effort and Preferences for Redistribution (IV Estimates) 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) 
 Equality, 2nd stage
Equality, 1st stage 
(dep. var.: initia-
tive) 
Initiative, 2nd 
stage 
Initiative, 1st stage 
(dep. var: equality)
Incomes should be made more equal   -0.117***  
   (0.045)  
Important in job: use initiative (0/1) 0.219    
 (0.379)    
Age 0.019*** 0.002*** 0.013*** 0.018*** 
 (0.006) (0.001) (0.003) (0.005) 
Age squared (/10³) -0.198*** -0.036*** -0.153*** -0.176*** 
 (0.062) (0.010) (0.027) (0.054) 
Male (0/1) -0.266*** 0.034*** 0.035* -0.309*** 
 (0.033) (0.005) (0.021) (0.028) 
Children (0/1) 0.011 -0.026*** -0.097*** 0.031 
 (0.047) (0.008) (0.019) (0.039) 
Low income (0/1) 0.951*** -0.106*** -0.230*** 0.872*** 
 (0.057) (0.007) (0.051) (0.034) 
Medium income (0/1) 0.592*** -0.073*** -0.150*** 0.569*** 
 (0.043) (0.006) (0.035) (0.029) 
Full time (0/1) -0.145 0.032 0.067 -0.229** 
 (0.119) (0.020) (0.050) (0.105) 
Part time (0/1) -0.141 0.003 -0.015 -0.128 
 (0.125) (0.021) (0.052) (0.111) 
Self-employed (0/1) -0.458*** 0.045** 0.082 -0.540*** 
 (0.128) (0.022) (0.060) (0.113) 
Retired (0/1) 0.062 0.014 0.015 -0.053 
 (0.123) (0.021) (0.051) (0.110) 
House wife (0/1) -0.038 -0.019 -0.105** -0.109 
 (0.123) (0.021) (0.051) (0.110) 
Student (0/1) -0.267* 0.073*** 0.164*** -0.320*** 
 (0.139) (0.024) (0.061) (0.121) 
Unemployed (0/1) 0.056 -0.022 -0.073 0.092 
 (0.132) (0.022) (0.055) (0.118) 
Married (0/1) -0.054 0.010 -0.026 -0.103** 
 (0.053) (0.010) (0.023) (0.045) 
Divorced (0/1) 0.005 0.054*** 0.065* -0.064 
 (0.085) (0.015) (0.035) (0.071) 
Separated (0/1) -0.033 0.060*** 0.06 0.006 
 (0.124) (0.021) (0.049) (0.106) 
Widowed (0/1) 0.047 -0.018 -0.120*** -0.098 
 (0.078) (0.014) (0.034) (0.071) 
Church member (0/1) -0.081** 0.038*** 0.091*** -0.142*** 
 (0.036) (0.006) (0.017) (0.030) 
GDP growth (annual %) 0.186*** -0.008** -0.025** 0.157*** 
 (0.022) (0.004) (0.011) (0.026) 
Top marginal tax rate 4.491*** -0.649*** -0.315 1.880** 
 (0.665) (0.107) (0.413) (0.877) 
 
 
 32 
 
 
(1) 
Equality, 
2nd stage
(2) 
Equality, 
1st stage  
(3) 
Initiative, 
2nd stage 
(4) 
Initiative, 
1st stage 
Instruments    
Trust (0/1) 0.052** Neighbors different  -0.197***
 (0.005)   (0.031)
Protestant (0/1) 0.015** Employment protection legislation  0.803***
 (0.008)   (0.106)
Bribe -0.009*** Growth volatility  0.226***
 (0.002)   (0.053)
Leisure -0.029***   
 (0.003)   
Observations 40,806  45,713 45,713
(Pseudo) R² 0.079    
Durbin-Wu-Hausmann endogeneity test  2.32  Wald test of exogeneity 2.76  
Hansen J 1.94  Probability exogenous 0.09  
Minimum eigenvalue statistic 55.42     
Shea's partial R² 0.005     
Notes to Table 1: Table 1 shows the determinants of effort and redistribution preferences based on data from five 
waves of the World Value Survey using data for OECD countries. Second stage models are estimated using 
maximum likelihood. A full set of year and country fixed effects is included. Column (1) shows the 1st stage 
regression for an instrumental variables regression (ivregress) using the variable “Incomes should be made 
more equal (Scale 1-10)” as the dependent variable. Instruments for “effort” are trust, protestant, leisure im-
portant, and accepting a bribe. Column (2) has the corresponding 2nd stage regressions. Column (3) shows the 1st 
stage regressions for an instrumentation variables (ivprobit) regression using the variable “Important to use 
initiative at work (0/1)” as the dependent variable. Instruments for “equality” are employment protection legisla-
tion, neighbors are different and growth volatility. Column (4) has the corresponding second stage regression. 
The omitted categories for employment status is the category “other”, for family status “single or never mar-
ried”, and for income “high income”. The constant term is not reported. ***, **, * = significant at the 1%, 5%, 
10%-level. Standard errors in parenthesis. 
 
 33 
 
Table 2: Simultaneously Modelling Effort and Preferences for Redistribution 
This table  shows the determinants of effort and redistribution preferences based on data from five waves of the 
World Value Survey using data for OECD countries. A full set of year and country fixed effects is included. 
Panel (a) presents the results for the first stage regressions (control variables omitted); panel (b) for the second 
stage regressions. Estimates in columns (1) and (2) of Panel (b) are based on the simultaneous equation model 
proposed by Maddala (1983) and implemented by Keshk (2003). The variables “Important to use initiative” and 
“Incomes should be made more equal” are the predicted values from the first stage regressions described in the 
main body of the text. The omitted categories for employment status is the category “other”, for family status 
“single or never married”, and for income “high income”. Estimates in columns (3) and (4) present the corre-
sponding single-equation estimates. ***, **, * = significant at the 1%, 5%, 10%-level. Standard errors in paren-
thesis. 
(a) First stage regression 
 Dependent variable: Equality (1-10) Dependent variable: Initiative (0/1) 
 Coef.  Std. Err. Coef.  Std. Err. 
Neighbors different -0.150 *** 0.037 0.041 *** 0.018 
Employment protection legislation 0.466 *** 0.105 -0.110 ** 0.051 
Growth volatility (%) 0.153 *** 0.064 0.004  0.031 
Trust (0/1) 0.015  0.030 0.133 *** 0.015 
Protestant (0/1) -0.036  0.044 0.052 ** 0.022 
Accepting a bribe -0.007  0.011 -0.030 *** 0.005 
 
 34 
 
(b) Second stage regressions 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) 
 Simultaneous equation model OLS Probit 
 Equality Initiative Equality Initiative 
Initiative (0/1)  0.100 -0.437**  
 (0.184) (0.038)  
Equality (1-10) -0.240**  -0.041**
 (0.087)  (0.004)
People can be trusted (0/1) 0.136***  0.132**
 (0.016)  (0.020)
Protestant (0/1) 0.044*  0.052*
 (0.023)  (0.026)
Accepting a bribe -0.032***  -0.031**
 (0.006)  (0.007)
Neighbors different -0.154*** -0.146**  
 (0.038) (0.049)  
Employment protection legislation 0.477*** 0.446  
 (0.107) (0.230)  
Growth volatility 0.150** 0.15  
 (0.065) (0.181)  
GDP growth (annual %) 0.069** -0.030** 0.06 -0.042*
 (0.034) (0.014) (0.091) (0.018)
Top marginal tax rate 5.877*** 0.815 5.656* -0.617
 (0.815) (0.706) (2.169) (0.431)
Age 0.018** 0.011** 0.020** 0.007
 (0.006) (0.004) (0.006) (0.005)
Age squared (/10³) -0.182** -0.154*** -0.213** -0.114*
 (0.067) (0.038) (0.063) (0.045)
Male (0/1) -0.274*** 0.022 -0.253** 0.075**
 (0.036) (0.029) (0.033) (0.025)
Children (0/1) 0.037 -0.080** 0.013 -0.085**
 (0.051) (0.026) (0.054) (0.021)
Low income (0/1) 0.928*** -0.096 0.841** -0.277**
 (0.073) (0.081) (0.064) (0.032)
Medium income (0/1) 0.598*** -0.082 0.537** -0.199**
 (0.055) (0.054) (0.047) (0.019)
Full time (0/1) -0.218* 0.06 -0.187 0.101
 (0.125) (0.067) (0.157) (0.058)
Part time (0/1) -0.181 -0.03 -0.175 0.005
 (0.131) (0.071) (0.164) (0.064)
Self-employed (0/1) -0.572*** 0.024 -0.531** 0.134*
 (0.137) (0.085) (0.178) (0.061)
Retired (0/1) -0.064 0.037 -0.051 0.047
 (0.128) (0.068) (0.174) (0.060)
House wife (0/1) -0.11 -0.092 -0.128 -0.07
 (0.128) (0.068) (0.172) (0.058)
Student (0/1) -0.344** 0.137* -0.283 0.201*
 (0.151) (0.081) (0.187) (0.081)
Unemployed (0/1) 0.032 -0.05 0.013 -0.056
 (0.138) (0.073) (0.175) (0.058)
Married (0/1) -0.103* 0.004 -0.095 0.026
 (0.056) (0.031) (0.066) (0.027)
Divorced (0/1) -0.026 0.131** 0.01 0.135**
 35 
 
 (0.092) (0.046) (0.071) (0.041)
Separated (0/1) 0.009 0.111* 0.034 0.108
 (0.128) (0.066) (0.112) (0.064)
Widowed (0/1) 0 -0.046 -0.013 -0.044
 (0.082) (0.043) (0.073) (0.043)
Church member (0/1) -0.072* 0.092*** -0.04 0.105**
 (0.042) (0.019) (0.043) (0.026)
Constant 1.078** 0.952*** 1.479 0.719**
 (0.352) (0.200) (0.772) (0.228)
Observations 32,647 32,647 32,647 32,647
(Pseudo) R² 0.085 0.047 0.09  
 Table 3: Design of the Lab Experiment 
 
(a) Real Effort Task 
Participants have to click on the two cells that add up to 10. 
 
4.67 4.81 3.05
5.82 5.06 4.28
6.36 5.19 4.57
 
 
(b) Elicitation of Redistribution Preferences 
Columns are percentages of the number of tasks this individual has correctly solved in part 1 of the 
experiment. Participants could enter percentages (expressed as integers) 
 
% 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 
2x2           
3x3           
4x4           
 
 
(c) Elicitation of Effort Preferences 
Columns are percentages of total group income to be collected and redistributed in equal shares. Par-
ticipants could enter the number of problems they committed to solve if the respective cell was deter-
mined to be payoff-relevant. 
 
% 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
2x2           
3x3           
4x4           
 
 37 
 
Table 4: Explaining Effort Choices 
The dependent variable measures effort choices, conditional on imposed degree of redistribution and difficulty of 
task. Results from a linear mixed effects model, with random effects for individual and group. Mean ability = 
mean number of problems solved within the group of 4, easy task = 2x2 tables, difficult task = 4x4 tables, refer-
ence category: 3x3 tables; imposed redistribution = percentage of group income redistributed equally, time for 
leisure = total time this participant took for actually solving the tasks from phases 2 and 3. The number of obser-
vations (N) is 2,880. Hausman test insignificant on all models. *** p < .001, ** p < .01, * p < .05. Standard error 
in parenthesis. 
 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 
Ability 0.442** 
(0.144) 
0.492** 
(0.147) 
   
Mean ability  -0.935 
(0.637) 
   
Ability – mean ability   0.492** 
(0.147) 
0.492** 
(0.147) 
0.492** 
(0.147) 
Easy task    9.447*** 
(0.306) 
9.447*** 
(0.298) 
Difficult task    -6.939*** 
(0.306) 
-6.939*** 
(0.298) 
Imposed redistribution     -10.562*** 
(0.846) 
Constant 11.367** 
(3.538) 
31.742* 
(14.313) 
21.549*** 
(1.198) 
20.713*** 
(1.211) 
23.089*** 
(1.255) 
N 2,880 2,880 2,880 2,880 2,880 
      
p model  .0022 .0028 .0008 <.0001 <.0001 
 
 
 38 
 
Table 5: Explaining Redistribution Choices 
The dependent variable measures each participant’s votes on the chosen percentage of redistribution for 30 com-
binations of imposed effort and difficulty per participant. Model 1-6 are linear mixed effects models, with error 
terms for individual and group; model 7 is a random effects Tobit, with group fixed effects, censoring from be-
low at 0. Ability = number of problems solved in phase 1, mean ability = mean number of problems solved with-
in the group of 4, easy task = 2x2 tables, difficult task = 4x4 tables, reference category: 3x3 tables, imposed effort 
= percentage of problems solves in phase 1, time for leisure = total time this participant took for actually solving 
the tasks from phases 2 and 3. The number of observations (N) is 2,880. Hausman test insignificant on all mod-
els. *** p < .001, ** p < .01, * p < .05. Standard error in parenthesis. 
 Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 
Ability -0.276 
(0.185) 
-0.280 
(0.190) 
     
Mean ability  0.074 
(0.824) 
     
Ability – mean ability   -0.280 
(0.190) 
-0.280 
(0.190) 
-0.280 
(0.190) 
-0.298 
(0.193) 
-0.725* 
(0.348) 
Easy task    -1.796*** 
(0.424) 
-1.796*** 
(0.417) 
-1.796*** 
(0.417) 
-3.009*** 
(0.645) 
Difficult task    3.347*** 
(0.424) 
3.347*** 
(0.417) 
3.347*** 
(0.417) 
4.944*** 
(0.635) 
Imposed effort     5.697*** 
(0.593) 
5.697*** 
(0.593) 
9.344*** 
(0.912) 
Time for leisure      -0.001 
(0.003) 
0.002 
(0.007) 
Constant 19.066*** 
(4.529) 
17.451 
(18.528) 
12.713*** 
(1.547) 
12.196*** 
(1.566) 
7.923*** 
(1.628) 
6.736* 
(2.955) 
4.602 
(15.542) 
N 2,880 2,880 2,880 2,880 2,880 2,880 2,880 
        
p model .1356 .3270 .1409 <.0001 <.0001 <.0001 <.0001 
 
 39 
 
Graph 2: Preferences for Redistribution and Effort 
This table shows the mean responses to the questions “Opportunity to use initiative” (0/1) and “Incomes should 
be made more equal” (10-1) of the World Value Survey. The four waves capture the years 1981-84, 1989-93, 
1994-99, and1999-2004. Not all questions have been asked in all countries in each wave. 
(a) “Opportunity to use initiative” (0/1) 
 
(b) “Incomes should be made more equal” (1-10) 
 
 
 40 
 
Graph 3: Descriptive Statistics Lab Experiment 
 
(a) Distribution of Redistribution Choices 
 
0
.0
5
.1
.1
5
D
en
si
ty
0 20 40 60 80 100
redistr
unconditional redistribution choices
 
 
(b) Distribution of Effort Choices 
 
0
.0
2
.0
4
.0
6
.0
8
.1
D
en
si
ty
0 10 20 30 40 50
effort
unconditional effort choices
 
 
(c) Redistribution Preferences Conditional on Effort Preferences 
0
20
40
60
80
100
re
di
st
av
0 10 20 30 40 50
effortav
lowest second third highest
effort vs. redistribution choices, by ability
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 41 
 
 
General Instructions for Participants 
 
 
Welcome to our experiment! 
If you read the following instructions carefully, you can earn a substantial amount of money, 
depending on your decisions. It is therefore very important that you read these instructions 
carefully.  
During the experiment, any communication with the other participants is strictly forbidden. 
Disobeying this rule will lead to exclusion from the experiment and from all payments. If you 
have any questions, please raise your hand. We will come to you.  
In the first three parts of the experiment, we shall speak not of Euro, but instead of Taler. 
Your income is hence initially calculated in Taler. What you earn is converted into Euro at the 
end of the experiment, at the rate of 
1 Taler = 40 Cent 
The sum you have earned in the course of the experiment will be paid to you in cash and in 
Euro. 
In this experiment, you will make decisions. The consequences of these decisions depend not 
only on your own behavior, but also on chance. We shall explain in more detail further on 
what role chance plays. How the other participants in the experiment behave is not relevant 
for your payments in the first part of the experiment. 
The experiment consists of five parts. We will explain each part separately.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 42 
 
 
Part One 
 
 
In the first part of the experiment, we will show you a number of tables on your screen, which 
look like this: 
4.67 4.81 3.05
5.82 5.06 4.28
6.36 5.19 4.57
Your task is to click on the two cells that add up to 10. In every table, there is always only one 
single pair that adds up exactly to 10. You have one try each time. If your answer is correct, 
you will receive one Taler.  
The tables differ in size. We will present the tables to you in the following order: 
2 x 2 
3 x 3 
4 x 4 
Your income does not depend on the number of cells. For every task solved correctly, you 
will hence receive one Taler.  
This part of the experiment lasts exactly 10 minutes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43 
 
 
Part Two 
 
 
In the second part of the experiment, you have exactly the same task as in the first part. For 
each table in which you correctly define the number pair that adds up to 10, you will once 
again receive payment of one Taler. Here, however, you are only shown tables of one particu-
lar size. The computer will determine – at random and with the same likelihood for each case 
– whether your tasks consist of tables with size 2 x 2, 3 x 3, or 4 x 4. All participants are 
shown tables of the same size.  
The computer will also determine randomly how many tasks all experiment participants have 
to solve in this part of the experiment. Only once you have completed as many tasks as the 
computer has determined will you receive a payoff for this part and the other parts of the ex-
periment. We will show you these tasks at the end of the experiment. There is no time limit. 
As soon as the first participant has solved all of the required tasks, we will begin with the 
payoff. You do not have to wait for the last participant to finish. We will determine the num-
ber of tasks according to, and depending on, the statistics from the first part of the experiment. 
The required number of correctly solved tasks lies between 30 and 120 % of the number of 
tasks you have correctly solved in the first part. If the number was low, the number required 
in this part of the experiment will hence also be lower. If it was high, the number required in 
this part of the experiment will also be higher. If the result is not a whole number, we will 
choose the next smallest whole number. 
In this part of the experiment, you are part of a group of 4 participants. We form this group 
according to the following principle: We use the results from the first part to divide all partic-
ipants in the lab into 4 classes. The 25% who did worst are placed in the first class. The 25% 
who did best are placed in the second class. All remaining participants make up the last two 
classes. From each class, we randomly assign one participant to each group. We will tell you 
which class you belong to and how many tasks all 4 participants in your group solved correct-
ly on average in the first part. 
Each group can adjust the participants’ income. In order to do this, each participant deter-
mines what percentage of the income shall be used for this purpose. We will show you the 
following table in return: 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 
% 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 
2x2                     
3x3                     
4x4                     
 
For each percentage of tasks and for each number of cells, please write in this table what per-
centage of the income should be retained and equally distributed among all 4 group members.  
The computer will then, first of all, determine the number of tasks to be solved, as well as the 
size of the table. For the chosen situation, the computer will then determine whether and, if 
so, to what extent the income will be adjusted. The computer will place the four group mem-
bers’ decisions in an order that follows the percentage that group members would be willing 
to part with. The mean between the second-highest and the third-highest percentage is deter-
mined as the adjustment.  
The following example sheds some more light on this mechanism: 
Let us assume the 4 group members have chosen compensation of 22, 35, 25, and 0 % for the 
case in question. The second-highest value is 22 %, and the third-highest value is 25 %. The 
average value between these two values is 23.5 %. In order to finance the adjustment, each 
participant receives a gross income (100%) minus 23.5 %. In other words, everyone gets 76.5 
% of their gross income. The remaining income of all participants is divided by 4 and distrib-
uted evenly amongst the participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45 
 
 
 Part Three 
 
 
In the third part of the experiment, the basic task is the same as in the first and second parts. 
All decisions and payments are made independently of the decision made in Part Two of the 
experiment. 
For each table in which you correctly determine the pair of numbers that adds up to 10, you 
will once again receive a payment of one Taler. Just as in the second part of the experiment, 
you will only see tables of one particular size. The computer will once again decide, randomly 
and with equal probabilities, whether your tasks will consist of tables of the size 2 x 2, 3 x 3, 
or 4 x 4. All participants will see tables of the same size in this part of the experiment also. 
Once again, you will form a group of four players with the same participants you played with 
in the second part.  
In this part of the experiment, the computer determines the amount of the ex-post compensa-
tion amongst the group members. It lies between 0 % (no compensation) and 45 %, in equal 
steps of 5 %. The computer chooses a random percentage. All percentages can occur with 
equal probabilities. Again, compensation is earned by all members of the group. The entire 
sum that all members have earned will be distributed evenly between all four group members.  
In this part of the experiment, we would ask you please to state – for every compensation rate 
and for all three table sizes – how many tasks you wish to solve. Please note that the number 
you enter is binding. You are obliged to comply with your commitment at the end of the ex-
periment, once the computer has completed all random decisions. Only once you fulfill this 
obligation will you receive your payoff for this part and all other parts of the experiment. 
There is no time limit. As soon as you have fulfilled your obligations from the second and 
third part of the experiment, we will begin with the payoff. You therefore do not have to wait 
for all others to finish. Please make your decisions for every compensation rate and for every 
table size. We will show you the following table in return: 
% 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
2x2                     
3x3                     
4x4                     
 
 
 
 
 
 46 
 
 
 Part Four 
 
 
We are interested in knowing how you rate the other participants’ behavior. We have two 
questions on this. 
1.  In your opinion, how many tasks have all participants (including yourself) correctly 
solved in the first part of the experiment? 
Please give an integer number. If necessary, we will round the actual number. If your estimate 
does not deviate from the actual (rounded) number by more than +2 or -2 tasks, you will re-
ceive an additional 1 €. If your estimate does not deviate from the actual (rounded) average by 
more than +5 or -5 tasks, you will receive an additional 50 Cent. 
2.  In your opinion, what compensation percentage have participants chosen on average if 
they had to get exactly the same number of tasks right as in the first part, and if the ta-
bles had 3x3 cells?  
Please give an integer number once again. If necessary, we will round the actual number. If 
you have guessed this number exactly, you will receive an additional 1 €. If your estimate 
does not deviate from the actual (rounded) average by more than +5 or -5, you will receive an 
additional 50 Cent. 
For recapitulation purposes, we will now show you the complete table on your screen. We 
have marked the cell our question relates to. However, please fill in only the box in which we 
ask you for your estimate of the average. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
% 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 
2x2                     
3x3               x     
4x4                     
 47 
 
 
 Part Five 
 
 
In the fifth and final part of the experiment, only your decisions count. You do not need to 
complete any further tasks.  
In this part of the experiment, we would ask you please to make a choice between Options A 
and B in 10 different cases. These 10 cases are shown to you in a list on your screen. Each of 
the two lotteries consists of 2 possible monetary winnings, one high and one lower, paid 
with different probabilities.  
Options A and B are presented on the screen as in the following example: 
 
Case Option A Option B Your decision 
1 
2.00 Euro with a probabil-
ity of 10% 
or 
1.60 Euro with a probabil-
ity of 90% 
3.85 Euro with a probability 
of 10% 
or 
0.10 Euro with a probability 
of 90% 
 Option A 
 
 Option B 
 
The computer uses a random program that will determine exactly your payment according to 
the given probabilities. 
For this example, this means: 
With a probability of 10 %, Option A will earn 2 Euro; and with a probability of 90 %, Option 
A will earn 1.60 Euro. 
With a probability of 10 %, Option B will earn 3.85 Euro; and with a probability of 90 %, 
Option B will earn 0.10 Euro. 
On the right-hand side, you now have to click whichever option you have chosen. 
Please note that at the end of the experiment only one of these 10 cases is actually paid out to 
you. All cases are equally probable, and the computer will choose a payoff-relevant case. 
Following that, there will be a draw to determine whether, for the payoff-relevant case, the 
higher winnings (2.00 Euro or 3.85 Euro) or the lower winnings (1.60 Euro or 0.10 Euro) 
will be paid out. 
 
 
 
 48 
 
 
Questionnaire 
 
 
Finally, we would ask you please to answer the following questions. Your answers will also 
remain anonymous.  
 
How old are you? 
 
Are you male or female? 
 
Are you enrolled in a university? 
If yes: What subject are you studying? 
If no: What is your occupation? 
 
Have you ever been employed full-time? 
 
Have you ever been out of work? 
 
Are you part of a religious community? 
If yes: Which one?  
 
What is your family status? (married, in cohabitation, divorced, separated, widowed, single) 
 
Do you have children? 
 

