 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Smart Metering and Electricity Demand:  
Technology, Economics and International Experience 
 
 
Aoife Brophy Haney, Tooraj Jamasb and Michael Pollitt 
 
 
February 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
CWPE 0905 & EPRG 0903 
 
 
  
www.eprg.group.cam.ac.uk 
E
P
R
G
 W
O
R
K
IN
G
 P
A
P
E
R
 
Abstract 
Smart Metering and Electricity Demand: 
Technology, Economics and International 
Experience 
EPRG Working Paper    EPRG0903 
Cambridge Working Paper in Economics  0905 
Aoife Brophy Haney, Tooraj Jamasb and Michael 
G. Pollitt  
 
In recent years smart metering of electricity demand has attracted 
attention around the world. A number of countries and regions have 
started deploying new metering systems; and many others have set 
targets for deployment or are undertaking trials. Across the board 
advances in technology and international experience characterize the 
metering landscape as a fast-changing one. These changes are taking 
place at a time when increasing emphasis is being placed on the role of 
the demand-side in improving the efficiency of energy markets, 
enhancing security of supply and in unlocking the benefits of energy and 
carbon savings. Innovative forms of metering can be a useful tool in 
achieving an active demand-side and moving beyond a supply-focused 
sector.  
In this paper we focus in particular on smart metering in liberalized 
electricity markets. We firstly set the context for innovative electricity 
metering in terms of policy, the role and market structure for metering, 
and the potential for smart metering to increase demand-side 
participation. We then provide an overview of new metering 
technologies by examining international trends, the 
various components of smart metering systems, and the 
likely future developments. Next we assess the 
economics of smart meters focusing on the costs and 
  
www.eprg.group.cam.ac.uk 
E
P
R
G
 W
O
R
K
IN
G
 P
A
P
E
R
 
benefits of smart metering and the distribution of these. We review the 
evidence in Europe, North America and Australia; we look at how 
countries and regions have differed in their approaches and how these 
differences have had an impact on policy making. We conclude by 
outlining the main challenges that remain, particularly in technology 
choice and its regulation, the methodology of analyzing costs and 
benefits and the role of uncertainty in investment and policy making. 
Keywords Electricity demand, smart meter, energy saving, demand-side 
participation 
JEL Classification L94, Q41, Q48 
Contact aoife.brophy@econ.cam.ac.uk    
Publication January, 2009 
Financial Support EPSRC Supergen Flexnet and ESRC Electricity 
Policy Research Group 
  
SMART METERING AND ELECTRICITY DEMAND:  
TECHNOLOGY, ECONOMICS AND INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE 
 
Aoife Brophy Haney1 
ESRC Electricity Policy Research Group and  
Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge 
 
Tooraj Jamasb 
ESRC Electricity Policy Research Group and  
Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge 
 
Michael G. Pollitt 
ESRC Electricity Policy Research Group and  
Judge Business School, University of Cambridge 
 
                                                          
1
 Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge, Austin Robinson Building, Sidgwick Avenue, Cambridge CB3 
9DD, United Kingdom. Telephone: +44 (0)1223 335285, Email: aoife.brophy@econ.cam.ac.uk 
  
SMART METERING AND ELECTRICITY DEMAND: 
TECHNOLOGY, ECONOMICS AND INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE2 
Abstract 
In recent years smart metering of electricity demand has attracted attention around 
the world. A number of countries and regions have started deploying new metering 
systems; and many others have set targets for deployment or are undertaking trials. 
Across the board advances in technology and international experience characterize the 
metering landscape as a fast-changing one. These changes are taking place at a time 
when increasing emphasis is being placed on the role of the demand-side in improving 
the efficiency of energy markets, enhancing security of supply and in unlocking the 
benefits of energy and carbon savings. Innovative forms of metering can be a useful 
tool in achieving an active demand-side and moving beyond a supply-focused sector.  
 
In this paper we focus in particular on smart metering in liberalized electricity markets. 
We firstly set the context for innovative electricity metering in terms of policy, the role 
and market structure for metering, and the potential for smart metering to increase 
demand-side participation. We then provide an overview of new metering technologies 
by examining international trends, the various components of smart metering systems, 
and the likely future developments. Next we assess the economics of smart meters 
focusing on the costs and benefits of smart metering and the distribution of these. We 
review the evidence in Europe, North America and Australia; we look at how countries 
and regions have differed in their approaches and how these differences have had an 
impact on policy making. We conclude by outlining the main challenges that remain, 
particularly in technology choice and its regulation, the methodology of analyzing costs 
and benefits and the role of uncertainty in investment and policy making. 
 
 
Key words: Electricity demand, smart meters, energy saving, demand-side participation 
 
JEL classification: L94, Q41, Q48 
 
                                                          
2
 This work was supported by the ESRC Electricity Policy Research Group and the EPSRC FlexNet Consortium 
of Supergen. The authors would like to thank one anonymous referee for helpful comments.  
 2 
1 Table of Contents 
2 Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 1 
3 The context for smart electricity metering ........................................................................... 2 
3.1 The policy context for smart metering ................................................................................. 2 
3.2 Metering and liberalised electricity markets ........................................................................ 3 
3.3 Electricity metering and active demand ............................................................................... 6 
4 Metering technology overview ........................................................................................... 12 
4.1 Technology trends .............................................................................................................. 12 
4.2 The electricity meter: from ‘ traditional’ to ‘smart’ ............................................................ 15 
4.3 Adding communications: the smart meter as part of the smart system ............................ 19 
4.4 Smart metering technology in international context ......................................................... 21 
5 Economic assessment of smart metering ........................................................................... 27 
5.1 New functionality and its application ................................................................................. 27 
5.2 Costs of smart metering...................................................................................................... 29 
5.3 Benefits of smart metering ................................................................................................. 33 
5.4 Market models .................................................................................................................... 36 
6 International evidence on the costs and benefits of smart metering ................................ 39 
6.1 International overview ........................................................................................................ 40 
6.2 International analysis: Smart metering costs ..................................................................... 44 
6.3 International analysis: Operational benefits of smart metering ........................................ 50 
6.3.1 Suppliers and network operational benefits ................................................................. 51 
6.3.2 Economic and customer operational benefits .............................................................. 54 
6.4 International analysis: Demand response benefits of smart metering .............................. 55 
6.5 Minimum functionality requirements ................................................................................ 60 
7 Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 62 
8 REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................ 65 
 
 
 
 1 
2 Introduction 
The participation of the demand-side is essential in improving the overall efficiency of energy markets.  
In liberalised electricity markets, active participation by demand has been limited to date, although 
there is now increasing emphasis on its importance in contributing to a number of energy policy 
challenges (Bilton et al., 2008; Borenstein et al., 2002; Spees and Lave, 2007). Climate change, security 
of supply, and fuel poverty are the three main areas where a more active demand-side has the potential 
to have both significant and cost-effective impacts (Ofgem, 2006d). 
Figure 1 illustrates the importance of (1) early investment in the demand-side; (2) the long-term role of 
renewables; and (3) the phasing out of conventional coal in moving from the business as usual (BAU) 
trajectory towards achieving European emissions targets (represented by the black dotted line). 
 
Figure 1: Investors’ perspective: strategic choices to achieve European CO2 targets 
 
Source: Neuhoff (2007) 
 
The widespread recent interest in smart electricity metering can best be understood in the context of 
investing in demand-side participation. Innovative forms of metering allow for more detailed 
information to be collected on electricity consumption; communications technology facilitates greater 
interaction between the end-user and the rest of the electricity supply chain; and both information and 
interaction allow for end-users to become more actively involved in the electricity market by, for 
example, responding to price signals and information on consumption patterns. 
 2 
Smaller electricity users (domestic, small and medium sized enterprises (SME)) have been the focus of 
smart metering policy debate around the world as these users have traditionally not been given the 
appropriate incentives, means or the information to become active participants.  In the European Union 
(EU), the 2006 Energy Services Directive (2006/32/EC) has given fresh impetus to energy efficiency 
policy making.  As part of this drive, the Directive requires Member States to incorporate metering and 
billing policies into their National Energy Efficiency Action Plans.  Providing information on actual 
consumption lies at the core of this requirement and has prompted a number of EU countries to explore 
the costs and benefits of implementing smart metering. 
This paper presents an assessment of smart metering in liberalised electricity markets by investigating 
the technology, economics and international experience to date. By developing this framework, we shed 
light on the variations in international approaches and the challenges that remain in promoting smart 
metering as a tool for active demand. Section 2 sets the context for smart electricity metering.  Section 3 
reviews metering technology developments and explores international trends. Section 4 provides a 
framework for a social cost benefit analysis of smart metering.  International experience in studying the 
costs and benefits is analysed in Section 5.  Challenges and lessons from international experience are 
presented in Section 6 and finally, Section 7 concludes the paper. 
3 The context for smart electricity metering 
3.1 The policy context for smart metering 
One of the main policy drivers in Europe for considering more advanced forms of metering and more 
informative billing has been the 2006 EU Energy Services Directive (2006/32/EC).  The directive places 
greater emphasis on the role of the demand-side in improving the efficiency of energy markets and in 
unlocking energy and carbon savings.  Smart metering is increasingly seen as a tool in promoting more 
responsive demand in the market for electricity in the context of improving security of supply, reducing 
CO2 emissions and tackling the growing problem of fuel poverty. 
The directive requires member states to implement National Energy Efficiency Action Plans; Article 13 of 
the directive deals specifically with metering and billing. Member states are obliged to ensure that 
metering and billing of energy consumption for all customers reflect actual consumption and provide 
information on the time of use, as long as it is technically possible and cost-effective to do so (European 
Union, 2006).  Understandably this has encouraged much debate and a number of consultations on the 
costs and benefits of implementing more advanced metering solutions. This has been the case 
particularly for small energy users, i.e. domestic and small business customers, where up until now very 
few have had meters installed that allow billing to be based on actual consumption. 
The role of regulation in promoting smart metering has also been the subject of debate particularly in 
Great Britain where the regulator has decided that competition in metering is the best way of ensuring 
that smart metering delivers for customers (Ofgem, 2006d).  The UK government set out its expectation 
in the 2007 Energy White Paper that all gas and electricity customers would be given smart meters with 
 3 
separate displays over the next ten years (DTI, 2007).  Furthermore, gas and electricity suppliers would 
be required to install smart meters in the SME sector above a certain energy consumption threshold 
from 2008; and electricity suppliers would be required to provide real-time display units (a unit that 
displays actual consumption but does not replace the existing meter or communicate with the supplier) 
to all domestic customers who requested one and where meters were replaced or newly installed (DTI, 
2007). 
The most recent government response on metering and billing policies in April 2008 has confirmed that 
smart meters will be required by 2013 for the higher consumption end of the SME sector; the policy on 
real-time display units has been partially reversed and the government is working on a voluntary 
agreement with suppliers in its place; and further work will be conducted to finalise policy for domestic 
and small business users (BERR, 2008a).  Questions, therefore, still remain and it is timely to examine 
developments and decision-making in other countries for insight.  Firstly, however, we will take a closer 
look at metering in liberalised electricity markets and the role of demand response to establish the 
importance of evaluating new metering and billing policies. 
3.2 Metering and liberalised electricity markets 
In its 2001 strategy for metering, Ofgem, the regulator for electricity and gas in Great Britain, set out the 
four key reasons for the importance of metering to electricity and gas customers as follows: 
1. “Meter readings determine how much a customer is billed 
2. The type of meter provided determines whether a customer pays for his energy on credit, or 
whether he pays before he consumes energy 
3. Meters can provide information to the customer on how much gas or electricity they use in any 
particular time period; and 
4. Metering costs contribute to the total bill paid by a customer” (Ofgem, 2001, p. 10). 
Metering service consists of several activities that do not necessarily have to be carried out by a single 
party: (i) meter provision (supplying metering equipment); (ii) meter operation (installation, operation 
and maintenance); and (iii) meter reading and data processing. 
Traditionally, meters have been owned and metering activities have been undertaken by network 
operators.  Even since the liberalisation of electricity markets this has continued to be the case in many 
European countries as can be seen from Table 1.  Despite this trend, several countries have pursued 
competition in metering; the three main examples of this are Great Britain, Germany and the 
Netherlands.  Two main models for metering have therefore emerged within the EU: (i) a regulated 
model where metering activities are treated as a regulated monopoly; and (ii) a liberalised model where 
some or all metering activities are open to competition. 
 
 4 
Table 1: Ownership of electricity and gas meters in Europe 
OWNERSHIP ELECTRICITY GAS 
Distribution Network Operator 
(DNO) 
BE, DE, ES, IT, LT, LU, LV, NO, PL, 
PT, SE, SK, UK 
BE, CZ, DE, ES, IT, LU, PL, SI, 
SE, SK, UK 
Supplier ES, UK  UK 
Metering company DE, UK DE 
Municipality FR CZ 
Consumer ES, PL, SI, UK CZ, PL, SI, ES, UK 
Ownership not regulated DK DK, LV 
None of the above BE, GR - 
Source: ERGEG (2007) 
In Great Britain, competition in metering is currently in a period of transition.  When Public Electricity 
Suppliers in each region were required to separate their supply and distribution businesses in 2000, the 
DNOs took responsibility for all existing metering service.  As incumbent meter service providers, they 
were obliged to provide metering services in their home areas if requested by suppliers.  Prices for 
meter provision and operation offered by incumbents (separated from distribution charges) have since 
been regulated by Ofgem.  Tables 2 and 3 show the price caps for domestic electricity meters and 
revenue caps for domestic electricity meter operation.  Since this time, suppliers have also been given 
the right to choose alternative meter operators, data collectors or data aggregators (Ofgem, 2001). 
The regulated and commercial markets for metering have therefore coexisted in Great Britain.  Although 
incumbents maintain a strong overall market share, competition is developing.3  In the meter provision 
market, competitors are estimated to have obtained less than 1% of the market.  In the market for 
meter operation it is estimated that competitors provide operation for around 20% of electricity meters 
                                                          
3
 Incumbent meter businesses are the Gas Transporters (National Grid Gas and the four independent distribution 
networks created in 2005) and electricity DNOs operating distribution networks in the 14 ex-PES regions (Scottish 
& Southern Energy, Scottish Power, United Utilities, Yorkshire Electricity Distribution Ltd., Northern Electricity 
Distribution Ltd., EON, EDF Energy and Western Power Distribution (Ofgem, 2006b). 
Country Key: BE: Belgium; CZ: Czech Republic; DE: Germany; DK: Denmark; ES: Spain; FR: France; GR: Greece; 
IT: Italy; LT: Lithuania; LU: Luxembourg; LV: Latvia; NO; Norway; PL: Poland; PT: Portugal; SE; Sweden; SI: 
Slovenia; SK: Slovak Republic; UK; United Kingdom 
 5 
and that 20% of new and replacement meters are being installed through competitive tenders (Ofgem, 
2006b). 
Table 2: Price caps for annual domestic meter rental charges 
Electricity meter type Price cap - £ per year 
2002/03 prices* 
Domestic credit 
 
1.12 
Prepayment (average cap for token, 
key and smartcard meters) 
9.75 
*Note: These caps are indexed for inflation for subsequent years 
Source: Adapted from Ofgem (2006b) 
Table 3: Revenue caps for electricity meter operation 
Chargeable activity Revenue cap - £ per activity 
(2002/03 prices)* 
Single-phase meter appointment 
(domestic credit or PPM)  
21.37 
Poly-phase meter appointment 
(larger domestic and some non-
domestic) 
34.91 
*Note: Activity charges 2002/03 prices and are indexed for inflation for subsequent years 
Source: Ofgem (2006b) 
The main example of this is Centrica.  In 2003 Centrica appointed alternative metering businesses for 
both electricity and gas on a regional basis with three separate businesses (Onstream, United Utilities 
and Siemens/Capital Meters) via competitively-sourced contracts.  Due to retail competition, churn 
contracts need to be negotiated between competitive metering businesses and other suppliers to set 
out the terms for continued meter rental if the customer chooses to switch supplier.  In addition, other 
suppliers are attempting to provide for some or all of their metering service in-house.  In gas, most 
suppliers have signed up for long-term metering contracts with National Grid (Ofgem, 2006a). Ofgem 
investigated these contracts under the Competition Act and in March 2008 announced a £41 million fine 
on the basis that the contracts blocked the introduction of smart gas meters. National Grid has appealed 
the decision to the Competition Appeal Tribunal (Power UK, 2008). 
 6 
Ofgem’s price controls on electricity meter operation and on the provision of new/replacement meters 
by distributors fell away on 31 March 2007.  Price controls remain in place for the provision of legacy 
meters installed before this date.  It is anticipated that bringing an end to price controls will encourage 
more suppliers to seek alternative service providers (Ofgem, 2006c). 
As suppliers in Great Britain are now responsible for purchasing metering services on behalf of their 
customers, any decisions about whether to invest in more advanced metering solutions are also up to 
them.  Competition among suppliers is relied upon to foster innovation in metering and to prevent lock-
in to one specific type of metering technology.  Furthermore, although metering makes up a small 
proportion of a customer’s final bill, it is central to the provision of good customer service (Ofgem, 2006 
c).  Ofgem considers that suppliers are best placed to manage the risks associated with investing in 
metering because they have access to the best information about their customers’ needs and will base 
their decisions on this information (Ofgem 2006d). 
3.3 Electricity metering and active demand 
Characteristics of electricity and electricity demand The participation of the demand-side in 
setting prices and clearing the market for electricity is limited even in liberalised electricity markets.  
Most customers are not given the opportunity to respond to fluctuations in the cost of delivering 
electricity to them.  Electricity has a marginal cost of production that fluctuates rapidly due to two of its 
main characteristics.  Firstly, because electricity must be consumed as it is produced its cost of 
production is sensitive to the time when it is used.  Secondly, it is the only product that is consumed 
continuously by almost all customers; its real-time demand determined by retail customers physically 
taking power from the grid rather than agreeing by contract with the generator in advance.  The cost of 
delivering electricity to the customer also fluctuates rapidly and depends on the amount of electricity all 
customers are demanding at any given time (Stoft, 2002). 
Although wholesale prices tend to vary hour by hour, retail prices are adjusted only a few times each 
year.   Residential customers in particular are rarely exposed to price fluctuations and typically pay a 
per-kWh electricity charge independent of the time of use.  In the UK, this alone accounts for 
approximately 34 percent of total consumption that is unresponsive to changes in wholesale price.4  
Large electricity customers in the UK on the other hand, — all those with a peak load above 100kW — 
are equipped with more advanced metering facilities that allow for half-hourly measurement of 
electricity consumption and automatic communication of this information  to the supplier. 
Residential demand tends to fluctuate more than commercial and industrial demands and residential 
consumers tend to have more peaky loads at times of system load factor when generation prices are 
high (Littlechild, 2003).  Because of this, there are broad implications for the rest of the market and 
                                                          
4
 Based on electricity consumption figures from DUKES (2006). 
 
 7 
electricity system from the lack of responsiveness of the residential load.  Technically demand is inelastic 
but the real problem is that there is a lack of pricing.  For instance, it is often not possible for suppliers to 
differentiate between peak and off-peak electricity prices for users who are metered on a non-half 
hourly basis. 
During hours of peak demand, peak-load generators with relatively low ramping costs must be 
dispatched in addition to baseload generators to meet additional power requirements.  Costs of 
production are higher during peak hours than at other times of the day when levels of demand can be 
satisfied by baseload generation alone.  The inability to signal short-run changes in the costs of 
generation at different times of the day and year means that consumers are not given any price 
incentive to use power when it is cheapest to produce, or to stop or reduce consumption when it is 
more expensive.  This in turn has an effect on the reliability of the system and on future peak-load 
capacity investment decisions, as significant investment is required to ensure that supply meets the 
daily, seasonal and annual variations in load. 
Active demand Up until now, the focus of improving efficiency in liberalized electricity markets 
has been very much on the supply-side, as in the case of the UK (Bilton et al., 2008).  As a natural 
progression of liberalization, the focus is now shifting to explore the potential efficiencies that greater 
participation of end-users in the market can bring.  The main barriers to increasing participation are (i) 
inelasticity of demand; and (ii) information asymmetry (Bilton et al., 2008). 
The literature on demand-side participation in the context of metering can be divided into two main 
strands directly related to these barriers 
1. Pricing: demand elasticity and the responsiveness of customers to various forms of pricing; 
2. Information: the effects of improving the information that is available to customers on their 
energy consumption. 
The first category is often referred to as demand response and is the most recent stage in the evolution 
of demand-side management programmes.  Pricing is central to demand response strategies and the 
overall aim is to increase the elasticity of electricity demand by giving customers price signals that are 
more cost-reflective.   More advanced forms of pricing require more advanced metering solutions.  
Technological advances have made this possible, however they are also more costly to implement.  
Deciding how advanced a metering infrastructure should be depends in part on the magnitude of 
response that advanced pricing structures can elicit. 
The concepts of time-of-use pricing (TOU), real-time pricing (RTP) and critical peak pricing (CPP) are not 
new, however their application in the past has been very limited particularly in the domestic and small 
business sectors.  Most recent studies of the price elasticity of electricity have included analysis of time-
of-use pricing (Ballard et al., 2001).  This form of pricing is static, i.e. the variation in retail price is 
determined in advance according to different blocks of time and is adjusted infrequently.  An early 
example of such a study in the residential sector is a series of time-of-use pricing experiments funded by 
 8 
the US Department of Energy beginning in 1975.  Atkinson’s 1981 study compares the results of two of 
these experiments and concludes that time-of-use prices are the most significant variables explaining 
time-of-use demand; and that time-of-use elasticities can lead to a significant reduction in the level of 
peak demand and an overall levelling of residential and system load curves (Atkinson, 1981). 
Gallant and Koenker (1984) address the question of residential time-of-use pricing around the same time 
based on data from another US experiment, in North Carolina.  In their study they ask whether the 
efficiency gains from residential time-of-use pricing exceed the metering costs necessitated by the more 
complex rate structures.  Their findings suggest that the costs of metering at that time outweigh the net 
welfare gain to households.  Filippini (1995) studies the elasticities of peak and off-peak residential 
electricity consumption using data on 220 households in 19 Swiss cities.  He finds that demand for both 
peak and off-peak electricity is elastic and that peak and off-peak electricity are substitutes. 
Studies have also focused on more dynamic forms of pricing particularly in recent years.  Real-time and 
critical peak pricing are both forms of dynamic pricing; real-time pricing being the most dynamic with 
different retail electricity prices for different hours of the day and different days of the week. The aim of 
this pricing system is to expose the demand-side to the price fluctuations in the wholesale market.  
Critical peak pricing (CPP) is a combination of time-of-use and real-time pricing.  Critical peak pricing 
structures are usually based on a time-of-use structure to begin with and this structure is then 
supplemented with a separate rate that applies to the critical peak hours.  These hours take place on 
days of the year when the system is under pressure and can be called at short notice.  There is usually a 
limit to the number of hours that can be called during the year, typically between 50 and 100 
(Borenstein et al., 2002). 
One of the most recent pricing pilots to include a critical peak pricing structure is the California 
Statewide Pricing Pilot conducted in 2003/2004.  Herter (2007) analyses the results from the pilot with a 
view to informing policy makers who are considering implementation of CPP rates in the residential 
sector.  Findings show that while high-use customers respond significantly more in terms of kW 
reduction than low-use customers; in terms of percentage reduction of annual electricity bills low-use 
customers save significantly more.  This would suggest that full-scale implementation of CPP may be a 
suitable strategy rather than targeting high-end users only, depending on the distribution of costs. 
Although there are strong theoretical arguments in favour of real-time pricing of electricity, 
implementation has been lacking and restricted mainly to industrial applications.  Technology has played 
a role in this as the cost of time-of-use metering until recently was substantially less than real-time 
metering.  However, cost reductions have made real-time metering more affordable in the last decade.  
Furthermore, technological advances have made it possible to combine real-time pricing with more 
sophisticated forms of automated demand response technology so that responding to frequent price 
changes does not always require customer intervention (Borenstein et al, 2002). 
The responsiveness of demand to various pricing structures can also manifest itself in long-run changes 
to consumer behaviour such as increased participation through microgeneration – the generation of 
 9 
electricity or heat within the home.  Cost-reflective pricing may encourage customers to rely on self-
supply when prices are high or to invest in microgeneration to supply to the grid at times of scarcity (i.e. 
high prices).  Additional meter functionality is required to differentiate between exports and imports of 
electricity.  Recent research by Keirstead (2007) has suggested that microgeneration can encourage 
further changes in household consumption.  The study shows that among households with PV installed 
in the UK, electricity consumption has been reduced by approximately 6% and demand has shifted to 
times of peak generation. Table 4 provides a summary of these pricing-based studies and their results. 
Innovation in and analyses of electricity pricing programmes have typically occurred in regions where 
summer and winter peaks are of prime importance to the electricity system.  Encouraging demand 
response in order to reduce or shift consumption from peak to off-peak periods have been the main 
goals.  The effects of improving the available information on customer energy consumption, on the 
other hand, have been explored mainly to understand how better information can encourage more 
energy efficient behaviour, i.e. reductions in total consumption. 
Making customers more aware of their energy consumption, how it breaks down by end-use for 
example or how consumption this week compares to last week, has the potential to encourage changes 
in consumer behaviour.  Darby (2006) reviews the evidence on the effectiveness of feedback on energy 
consumption at a household level and divides the types of feedback into two categories: (i) direct 
feedback, i.e. from the meter or a display monitor; and (ii) indirect feedback, i.e. information that has 
been processed in some way, for example billing.  Energy savings from direct feedback in the surveyed 
studies is in the region of 5 to 15% and energy savings from indirect feedback from 0 to 10%.  The 
studies reviewed have taken place in the USA, Canada, Scandinavia and the UK. One of the main 
conclusions of the study is that a user-friendly display should form part of any new meter specification 
to improve the level of direct feedback to customers. 
Wood and Newborough (2007) explore the main options for energy display types and in particular focus 
on the types of information that should be accessible through the display.  They conclude that it is 
important to avoid overloading customers with extremely detailed information for each appliance in the 
home as attention may be distracted from the main energy-consuming appliances.  They suggest a 
display that combines information on a small number of end uses with access to more detailed 
appliance-specific information for those who require it.  In a previous study, the same authors explore 
the feedback from smart meters and displays, focusing on individual appliances – in this case domestic 
cooking. They observe a much greater response from those receiving information from an electronic 
display attached to the electric cooker than those receiving paper-based information alone (Wood and 
Newborough, 2003). The conclusions of their work in the UK and those from the international review 
conducted by Darby (2006), suggest that there is growing evidence that more detailed information on 
energy consumption has a positive impact on levels of energy efficiency. 
 
 
 10 
Table 4: Summary of time-differentiated pricing studies 
STUDY SAMPLE SIZE 
(RESIDENTIAL 
CUSTOMERS) 
PRICING/SCHEME RESULTS COMMENTS 
Atkinson, 1981 
(Arizona) 
140 TOU: off-peak, mid-
peak and peak; 3 
groups; variations in 
price ratios 
Peak own-price elasticity: 
-0.68 to -0.78 
Compensation payment: 
adjustment of monthly bill 
Atkinson, 1981 
(Wisconsin) 
Approx. 700; over-
sample of urban, 
high consumption 
TOU: off-peak and 
peak; 3 groups; 
variations in price 
ratios 
Peak own-price elasticity:  
-0.81 to -0.83 
No compensation 
payment 
Gallant and Koenker, 
1984 
(North Carolina) 
514  TOU: 13 groups with 
off-peak, mid-peak 
and peak; variations 
in price ratios 
Net welfare gain of 5c per day 
vs. costs of 10c per day for 
metering 
No compensation 
payment 
Filippini, 1995 
(Switzerland) 
220 in 19 Swiss 
cities where time-
differentiated 
tariffs offered to all 
customers 
TOU Peak (off-peak) own-price 
elasticity:  
-1.25 to -1.41 
(-2.30 to -2.57) 
Partial elasticities: total 
electricity expenditure 
held constant 
Elasticity of substitution 
peak/off-peak: 
2.56 
Herter, 2007 
(California) 
457; representative 
of California 
population 
CPP: critical peak 
price on average 3 
times the TOU peak 
price and 6 times the 
off-peak price 
Mean peak-load change 
kWh/h during CPP events: 
High use: -0.21 
Low use: -0.02 
Fixed participation 
payment over pricing pilot 
of $175 
Average bill savings: 
High use: 1.7% 
Low use: 4% 
Keirstead, 2007 
(UK) 
118 UK PV 
households 
PV installation 6% reduction in electricity 
consumption post-PV 
installation 
Respondents significantly 
older, wealthier and 
better-educated than 
average  
 
 
 11 
Table 5: Summary of information-based energy studies 
STUDY TYPE OF INFORMATION RESULTS COMMENTS 
Darby, 2006 
 
Direct feedback: 
-self-meter reading 
-direct displays 
-interactive feedback via PC 
-prepayment meter 
-energy advice with meter reading 
-cost plugs on appliances 
5 to 15% 
savings 
Range of 
international 
studies with 
different types of 
direct feedback 
Darby, 2006 Indirect feedback: 
-more frequent bills 
-frequent bills based on readings plus 
other historical/comparative/detailed 
information 
0 to 10% 
savings 
Range of 
international 
studies with 
different types of 
indirect feedback 
Wood and 
Newborough, 
2003 
Electronic feedback via consumption 
indicator attached to electric cooker 
15% reduction 44 UK 
households; 
focus on 
electricity for 
cooking 
Paper-based information pack on 
electricity consumption of cooking 
appliances and electricity savings tips  
3% 
Dulleck and 
Kaumann, 2004 
Information leaflets on energy efficiency; 
introduction of energy efficiency 
appliance certifications 
7% reduction 
in electricity 
demand 
Impact on long-
run rather than 
short-run 
demand 
 
A recent analysis by Dulleck and Kaufmann (2004) of an electricity information programme in Ireland 
provides some useful insights into the short-run and long-run impacts of improved access to 
information.  The programme was targeted at small business and household users.  Customers were 
given information leaflets on energy efficiency and energy efficiency certifications for appliances were 
introduced.  Overall electricity demand was reduced by approximately 7%.  Interestingly, the 
programme had a larger impact on long-run demand with very little impact on short-run demand 
because the information affected the long-run investment decisions of customers. These information-
based studies are summarised in Table 5. 
 Smart metering as a tool for active demand Smart meters with advanced communications are a 
gateway to increasing the participation of the demand-side in the electricity market through facilitating 
new pricing structures and overcoming information asymmetry. They can also act as a platform for 
automated forms of demand response by connecting with smart appliances, such as the smart 
thermostat, to control loads directly.  Improving the flexibility of network operation is likely to become 
even more important in the future with the further integration of intermittent energy resources such as 
wind to the network. More responsive electricity demand will be important in contributing to this 
 12 
flexibility (Stadler, 2008); advanced communications, control methods and information technologies 
including more sophisticated metering will be central in achieving this goal (Strbac et al., 2006). 
The liberalisation of electricity markets has changed the incentive structure for investing in a more 
active demand-side by dispersing the value among the various actors in the liberalised market (IEA, 
2003).  Furthermore, as a tool for increasing demand-side participation, investing in smart metering has 
wide-ranging impacts on the entire supply chain.  Any adjustments to the incentives in place for end-
users to consume power in one segment of the market have an impact on end-users in the rest of the 
market and on the electricity system as a whole.  Changes in the way domestic consumers use power 
throughout the day through dynamic or time of use pricing mechanisms, for instance, can change 
domestic load profiles.  These changes may have an impact on electricity prices for other consumer 
segments, generation investment decisions and consequently the carbon intensity of the electricity 
system. 
Evaluating the costs and benefits of smart metering is therefore a complex process and one in which 
international comparisons in terms of experience with technology, market organisation and 
methodology of analysis are instructive. 
4 Metering technology overview 
4.1 Technology trends 
In the UK and most other countries, the traditional electromechanical Ferraris meter is still the 
predominant means of measuring energy consumption in homes and small businesses. Traditional 
electricity meters display consumption in kWh only, record consumption cumulatively and are read 
manually. Because of the need for a meter reader to periodically inspect the meter for an accurate 
reading or for customers themselves to report a meter reading to the supplier, billing is often based on 
estimates of consumption rather than on actual consumption and correction of estimates may only 
occur with a long delay. 
Where more advanced electronic meters have been installed, customers with high levels of average 
annual consumption (typically industrial and large commercial users) and higher levels of peak load are 
usually the first to be targeted. Figure 2 shows the penetration of advanced electricity metering in a 
number of European countries where percentage shares are less than 8%. In Denmark and Norway, each 
with advanced metering shares of 4%, advanced meters have been installed where annual consumption 
exceeds 100,000kWh; in Great Britain half-hourly metering (interval metering) is mandatory for users 
with maximum demand over 100kW (DTI, 2006, p. 22).  Companies under this threshold can choose to 
install half-hourly metering once they are prepared to pay the additional charge and upgrade the meter 
(Carbon Trust, 2007).  Collectively this group of users is referred to as Code 5. 
 
 13 
Figure 2: Advanced electricity meters in Europe: countries with relatively low penetration levels 
 
Source: ERGEG (2007) and Carbon Trust (2007) 
Table 6 gives a breakdown of the number of electricity meters, type of billing and the corresponding 
average annual consumption of the 8 electricity profile classes and Code 5 customers in Great Britain. 
While customers in the Code 5 category account for a small share of total meters (less than 0.5%), their 
share of total electricity consumption is close to 50% (Devine-Wright and Devine-Wright, 2006; and 
Table 2). Accurate billing for large consumers is particularly important because any inaccuracies could 
potentially be large relative to overall consumption levels (Carbon Trust, 2007). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DK
GR
LT
LV
NO
PT
ES
SK
UK
BE 
(IBGE)
BE 
(CWaPE)
CZ
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
%
 o
f 
a
d
v
a
n
c
e
d
 m
e
te
rs
 14 
Table 6:  Electricity meters, billing type and consumption by profile class in Great Britain 
Group Description General 
billing type 
Number of 
meters 
Average 
annual 
consumption 
% of total 
demand5 
Profile Class 1 Domestic Unrestricted Estimated/ 
Prepayment 
18,656,100/ 
3,600,000 
4,457 kWh
6
 36% 
Profile Class 2 Domestic Economy 7 Estimated 3,300,000 
Profile Class 3 Non-domestic 
unrestricted 
Estimated 1,662,800 14,900 kWh 18% 
Profile Class 4 Non-domestic 
economy 7 
Estimated 506,700 24,800 kWh 
Profile Class 5 Non-domestic 0-20% 
load factor 
Estimated 38,000 81,600 kWh 
Profile Class 6 Non-domestic 20-30% 
load factor 
Estimated 53,700 109,800 kWh 
Profile Class 7 Non-domestic 30-40% 
load factor 
Estimated 27,600 128,900 kWh 
Profile Class 8 >40% load factor 
 
Estimated 48,100 142,300 kWh 
Subtotal 27,893,000   
Code 5 High consumption
7
 Accurate 107,000 1,339,010 kWh 
 
46% 
Total 28,000,000   
Source: Adapted from Carbon Trust (2007) and DTI (2006) 
The countries shown in Figure 3 have at least 18% shares of advanced electricity meters installed, with 
plans to significantly expand implementation in the coming years.  Implementation in Italy is the most 
advanced with over 85%. 
                                                          
5
 This is percentage of total consumption for profile classes 1 to 8 and code 5 in Great Britain; it does not include 
consumption direct from high voltage lines or electricity produced via autogeneration. 
6
 This figure is for 2006 average domestic consumption for profile classes 1 and 2, taken from electricity 
consumption data at regional and local authority level in 2006 reported in DUKES (2006). 
7
 Industrial sites where peak consumption exceeds 100kWh for three consecutive months 
 15 
Figure 3:  Advanced electricity meters in Europe: countries with relatively high penetration levels 
 
Source: ERGEG (2007) and Ofgem (2006a) 
Results from ERGEG (2007), a survey of metering across Europe, indicate that although some 
consideration is being given to promoting smart meters in the gas sector, the current levels of 
implementation in Europe are very low.8 In the US, the overall penetration level of advanced metering is 
relatively low at 6% nationally.  However, there are considerable differences between penetration levels 
on a state by state basis.  Pennsylvania and Wisconsin stand out as frontrunners with 53% and 40% 
respectively for overall levels of advanced metering in both the electricity and gas sectors (FERC, 2006).  
Comparing countries and regions is a difficult task, however, because there is no single definition of 
what it means for a meter or a metering system to be ‘advanced’ or ‘smart’. 
 
4.2 The electricity meter: from ‘ traditional’ to ‘smart’ 
The smart gas or electricity meter is a device that forms a small but integral part of a smart metering 
system.  It provides consumption information in more detail than a traditional meter and a range of 
additional functions once the meter is connected to a communications network.  In general when the 
term smart meter is used, it is implied that the meter is capable of two-way communications. In this 
section we will focus on different existing types of electricity meters as international experience with the 
variety of functions and costs is more widespread than in either the gas or water sectors. 
                                                          
8
Belgium and Spain were the only countries to report figures for smart meters in the gas sector and both reported 
percentage shares of 0.05%. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Finland France Italy Sw eden
%
 o
f 
a
d
v
a
n
c
e
d
 m
e
te
rs
 16 
 Electromechanical The electromechanical meter displays electricity consumption in kWh 
and records it on a cumulative basis.  It is the most common type of meter in homes and small 
businesses in the UK and internationally.  The customer, residential or commercial, receives an 
estimated monthly bill for cumulative consumption; this estimate can be adjusted at a later stage once a 
meter reader has visited the premises or a customer has reported a reading to the supplier.  Tariffs are 
set by the supplier and are based on a unit (kWh) rate.  Suppliers may offer a tariff that charges a higher 
unit rate for consumption over a certain level, however in most cases the tariff rate is independent of 
time of use. 
As the meter records consumption cumulatively, there is no record of previous consumption. Certain 
types of electromechanical meters have multiple mechanical registers that can record cumulative 
consumption according to different times of the day.  Economy 7 meters in the UK provide two different 
readings: one for day-time and one for night-time usage9. Suppliers can apply a different rate to 
electricity consumption during the night when electricity is not as costly to produce (usually 7 hours 
from around 1am to 8 am) and customers are given an incentive to shift some consumption from peak 
to off-peak times.  Some Economy 7 customers opt for suppliers to control their systems automatically 
via a radio teleswitch; timing can be varied manually or in some cases remotely using teleswitch.  
Electric storage and hot water heating, for instance, can be controlled to switch on only once the night-
time rate has been activated. Demand response effects of this type of metering solution are limited and 
rely primarily on the role of the supplier in managing electricity demand (Bilton et al., 2008).  Billing is 
still based on estimated consumption and the information that reaches the customer is limited. 
 Retrofitting electromechanical meters The functionality of traditional meters can be 
improved by adding a variety of external attachments to them.  For example, it is possible to fit a 
prepayment attachment to a standard meter so that a customer can continue to use its existing 
metering system but with the added flexibility that prepayment tariffs may provide.10  Another type of 
simple retrofit is the addition of a real-time display unit to the existing meter. The most basic form of 
display is a device which can be clipped on to an existing electromechanical meter.  A sensor clip is 
attached to the mains electricity cables leading from the meter box to the fuse box.  The sensor plugs in 
to a transmitter which sends a signal to an external display located somewhere visible in the home.11 It 
is anticipated that providing consumers with real-time data on their consumption patterns will help 
them to become more aware of their electricity usage, reduce consumption and ultimately lead to 
carbon savings. 
                                                          
9
 Economy 7 meters are usually used only where gas for heating is not available. 
10
 Actaris metering manufactures this type of prepayment attachment (PayGuard) using a smart card to transfer 
data from the customer to the utility: http://www.actaris.com/html/products-385.html  
11
 The Wattson display and Electrisave displays operate in this way. See for example: 
http://www.diykyoto.com/wattson/how-wattson-works  
 17 
There is a variety of display devices currently on the market but the basic concept remains the same and 
they can be used for measuring and displaying electricity consumption only.  The displays generally offer 
consumers approximate information on their electricity consumption in monetary units and energy units 
and certain models also display the amount of CO2 emissions this corresponds to.  For this information 
to be displayed, however, the customer must be actively involved in inserting price and emissions 
information.  Depending on the design of the product the displays offer consumers various ways to alert 
them when consumption goes over a certain level, for example by setting an alarm or by triggering a 
warning light.  The metering system remains the same, however, and customers continue to be billed on 
an estimated basis. 
In the UK, the government initially proposed mandating electricity suppliers to provide real-time display 
devices on a new and replacement basis and to any customer that requested one. This proposal was 
reversed in 2008 because of widespread concerns that the requirement would delay the roll-out of 
smart meters and increase the costs of such a roll-out. Nevertheless, certain suppliers have started to 
provide display devices to customers as part of energy saving packages.12 The government also intends 
to reach a voluntary agreement with suppliers and does not rule out the possibility of real-time displays 
being part of metering policy in advance of a smart meter roll-out (BERR, 2008a). 
Electromechanical meters can also be retrofitted to become part of a completely new metering system, 
as has been the case in certain parts of the US.  In California, for example, Pacific Gas and Electric’s 
(PG&E) initial plans to implement advanced metering in its service territory relied on retrofitting 54% of 
existing electric meters and 96.1% of existing gas meters by fitting the meters with a communications 
module (PG&E, 2005). Installation on this basis began in November 2006, however PG&E has since filed 
a request with the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) to upgrade electromechanical meters to 
more advanced digital counterparts to enhance both customer and operational benefits (PG&E, 2008).  
While retrofitting electromechanical meters with communications modules has the advantage of not 
rendering the existing meters obsolete (and hence lowers stranded costs), more advanced meters have 
become more cost-effective in recent years and have the potential for greater functionality and 
therefore added benefits for customer, supplier and the rest of the electricity system. 
 Electronic Electronic, solid-state electricity meters (i.e. those that do not contain moving 
parts), come in a variety of forms, with varying degrees of functionality.  An interval electronic meter is 
most likely to be the metering device in a smart metering system.  Interval meters are essentially 
electronic meters that have the capability to record electricity consumption over a short period of time, 
usually 15, 30 or 60 minute intervals.  This allows for more complex time-varying pricing structures to be 
implemented and is the driving force behind the potential demand response benefits that interval 
meters can provide.  Beyond this basic requirement, there is a range of functions that can be added to 
the meter to increase the smartness of the meter and the metering system.  The meters can be read 
                                                          
12
 EON UK, for example, is offering customers a free energy monitor if they sign up to their Energy Saver 5 package. 
 18 
manually or they can be equipped with communications technology so that the supplier can read the 
meter remotely and in some cases also communicate back to the customer/meter.  Meters can also be 
fitted with the functionality to switch between credit and prepayment (FERC, 2006; NERA, 2007b). 
Two-way communications systems offer a wide variety of extra options for the supplier and services for 
the customer, including remote connection and disconnection, outage or loss of supply detection and 
communication to the supplier, and the ability to interface with load control technology.  Furthermore, 
some meters have the capability to record electricity that is imported from the grid as well as electricity 
that is exported to the grid, allowing for the measurement of output from micro-generators.  As is the 
case with electromechanical meters, electronic interval meters can also be fitted with an external 
display to provide a more visible means for customers to track their consumption and its related cost. 
Electronic prepayment meters are often referred to as ‘semi-smart’ because although they provide 
customers with more information on their consumption and a closer connection between the different 
levels of consumption and their financial implications, their communications capabilities are generally 
limited.  Within the prepayment category, there are however an increasing number of technological 
options.  Prepayment meters make up approximately 14% of domestic meters in Great Britain.  Just over 
a third (36%) are token meters; 42% are key meters and the remainder are smart card meters (Owen 
and Ward, 2007, p. 40). 
Token meters are the oldest type of prepayment meter technology and are on the decline mainly 
because of their high servicing costs and greater susceptibility to fraud and misdirected payments 
(Ofgem, 2005). Even at the most basic level of prepayment meter technology, the customer has more 
control over expenditure than with the traditional electromechanical meter because it is a ‘pay as you 
go’-type system.  Customers have a card with their account details and transactions and this card is used 
to buy credit at specified outlets.  In return for payment, customers receive paper tokens for their 
meter.  The customer is therefore not subject to estimated billing and may be more aware of electricity 
consumed over a shorter period of time than the usual credit customer’s billing period.  The meters, 
however, have to be manually adjusted after every price rise.  Furthermore, the tariffs charged to 
prepayment customers tend to be higher to reflect the higher servicing costs of the meters and there is 
also some correlation between customers on prepayment tariffs and those on low incomes (Ofgem, 
2005). For key and smart card prepayment meters, the system of payment is similar and the keys or 
cards are recharged once the customer adds more money to their account. 
Prepayment meter technology has advanced considerably in recent years and the costs of new 
prepayment systems relative to previous systems have declined substantially.  One of the clearest 
examples of this is in Northern Ireland.  After an initial trial of keypad electricity prepayment meters in 
200 homes, Northern Ireland Electricity started to roll-out the new meters in the year 2000.  There are 
currently 190,000 meters installed, approximately 25% of residential customers (Owen and Ward, 2007, 
p. 41). 
 19 
Customers purchase credit from local agents (e.g. supermarkets and cash machines), over the phone or 
online and they receive a ‘PowerCode’ number to enter into the meter once their purchase is complete. 
There is also a 2.5% reduction off the standard electricity rate for customers using keypad meters (NIE, 
n.d  .). 
As well as reducing the costs of the metering system (doing away with expensive token/key/card 
systems), the new prepayment technology offers a range of new functions for customers and suppliers. 
These include a detailed customised user display with information on credit time in days and 
information on costs over the previous day, week and month; unit rates and number of units used at 
these rates; previous purchase information; load limiting rather than disconnection; and the ability to 
programme the meters through vend codes rather than site visits (Ofgem, 2006a and PRI, n.d  .).  
Remotely programming the meters further reduces costs by eliminating the need for site visits to switch 
the meter between prepayment and credit (Owen and Ward, 2007). 
4.3 Adding communications: the smart meter as part of the smart system 
Communications technology is central to the most advanced types of metering systems that are 
currently available.  Adding communications capabilities to meters provides an enhanced level of 
functionality and allows for a greater level of interaction between the various actors in the supply chain.  
Meters that are not connected to a communications system require readings and any changes to the 
programming of the meter (for example connection/disconnection, switching from prepayment to 
credit) to be carried out manually. 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) refers to the entire infrastructure of meters, communication 
networks and data management systems required for advanced information to be measured, collected 
and subsequently used. Through this infrastructure, the meter is connected to the supplier, other 
market actors and can potentially be linked to appliances in the home through the Home Area Network 
(HAN).  Without the surrounding infrastructure, however, smart meters can only be used in much the 
same way as traditional electromechanical meters because most of their additional functionality cannot 
be supported. 
Figure 4 shows a simplified picture of how the various communication networks link parts of the AMI 
together. There are three main types of network: the Home Area Network (HAN), Local Area Network 
(LAN) and the Wide Area Network (WAN).  The meter can act as a platform for coordinating with other 
devices in the home (display devices, appliances, lights, thermostats, HVAC systems) and with the 
customer through the HAN and with the rest of the electricity system through the LAN and WAN.   There 
are two main categories of advanced metering systems that are differentiated by their levels of 
communication: Automated Meter Reading (AMR) and Automated Metering Management (AMM). 
 Automated Meter Reading (AMR) AMR allows for readings to be collected without the 
need for physical access to the meter.  The simplest form of AMR connects the meter temporarily via a 
radio link to an electronic meter reading device.  In the early days of residential AMR, particularly in the 
US, meter readers used handheld meter reading devices and connected to the meter as they walked or 
 20 
drove by the premises.  AMR can also be implemented using a permanent communications link between 
the meter and supplier. Various forms of wireless and wired communications technologies can be 
employed for this purpose.  Both the simple and more advanced forms of AMR allow for accelerated 
meter readings and more accurate billing.  Electromechanical or electronic meters can be used as part of 
the AMR system. 
Sites with half-hourly metering in the UK are usually equipped with some form of AMR so that suppliers 
can base billing on accurate consumption. How quickly the data can be accessed by customers depends 
on the individual supplier; a 2005 survey by the Carbon Trust found that the time it took energy 
suppliers to make data available varied from 24 hours up to one month (Carbon Trust, 2007). Generally, 
the information can be viewed online through the supplier’s website. Businesses are often equipped 
with a related software package (automatic monitoring and targeting software) so that energy 
consumption data can be monitored and usage optimised. Some of this equipment may be eligible for 
tax relief under the Enhanced Capital Allowance scheme in the UK for energy saving technologies 
(Carbon Trust, 2008). 
 Automated Meter Management (AMM) AMM goes a step beyond AMR and refers to the 
process of two-way communication between the meter and the rest of the network.  This type of 
remote management allows for commands/messages to be uploaded to the meters as well as data to be 
downloaded.  Remote management of the meter includes the capability for remote 
connection/disconnection and remote changes in contracted power or price schemes.  In general, 
electronic interval meters are used as part of an AMM system. 
For most communications solutions, the LAN connects the meters to intermediate data concentrators 
and the WAN transmits the data further to a central data system.  In Italy, ENEL uses Power Line Carrier 
(PLC) for the LAN and the public telecommunications network for the WAN.  PLC communications send 
signals over power lines between zone substations and meters.  Distribution Line Carrier (DLC) 
communications can also be used for the LAN; in this case the low voltage distribution network is used 
as a communication medium.  Mesh radio is an alternative to both PLC and DLC and is a private network 
radio technology which uses meters as repeaters in a mesh configuration before the data is transmitted 
to a concentrator.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 21 
Figure 4: Advanced metering infrastructure and the Home Area Network 
 
It is also possible to establish a direct connection between the meter and the central data system by 
using the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a mobile data connection (GSM/GPRS) or 
Ethernet/internet interfaces. There are a range of communication protocols that can be used for the 
HAN, for example Wi-Fi, Zigbee (a wireless standard) and Bluetooth. 
 Interoperability An open or interoperable metering system permits transparent access and 
integration among equipment and applications. By permitting vendor-independent solutions, an open 
system improves competition, gives greater flexibility and allows for future development rather than 
lock-in to one specific solution. Proprietary solutions by contrast limit the meter variations that can be 
used and restrict access to metering data. Internationally there are examples of both types of solutions. 
ENEL in Italy and PG&E in California use proprietary solutions; Ontario, Canada and SCE in California use 
open solutions (NEMMCO, 2007). 
4.4 Smart metering technology in international context 
Recent implementation A number of countries and regions within and outside Europe stand out 
because of their relatively high penetration levels of advanced metering.  The technologies used; the 
incentives behind implementation; and the recovery of costs differ as can be seen in Table 7 and in 
Table 8.  In Europe, Italy is the frontrunner where smart metering has been rolled out to 85% of low 
voltage customers. 
 
 
LAN
Smart 
Meter
HAN:
●Display
●Load control
●Smart 
appliances
Intermediate
Data
Collection
WAN
Central
Data
System
A
M
I
Information for:
●  Customer  
●  Supplier
●  Networks
●  System operator
 22 
Table 7: Recent and ongoing implementation of advanced electricity metering in Europe 
 Meter Communications Timeline Incentives/Cost recovery 
Italy 
 
Interval 
electronic 
AMM: PLC and public 
telecommunications; 
proprietary solution 
2001: ENEL (largest DNO – 85% of low 
voltage customers) begins Telegestore 
project  
2005: Acea Roma and Asmea Brescia 
start smart meter installations 
2007: 31 million digital meters installed; 
8 million remote operations and 180 
million readings 
2008: Mandatory installation by all other 
DNOs due to commence; gas 
consultation under way 
From 2004, metering service 
tariffs guarantee recovery of 
investments for low-voltage 
customers; efficiency gain 
targets for metering service 
2008-2011 recognize AMM’s 
potential in cutting operating 
costs 
Sweden 
 
Interval; some 
Zigbee-enabled 
AMR to begin with; 
more recently AMM; 
PLC and public 
telecommunications 
2003: Legislation requires monthly 
readings for all electricity users by 1 July 
2009 
Regulatory requirement to 
improve meter readings 
Northern 
Ireland 
 
Keypad 
prepayment 
Remote management 
of meters via vend 
codes 
2000: Roll-out by Northern Ireland 
Electricity (NIE) beings after initial trial in 
200 homes 
2008: Approx. 190,000 installed  
Incentive payments to NIE as 
part of supply price control in 
2000 and extended in 2005; 
Transfer of metering assets to 
transmission and distribution 
from April 2007 
Finland 
 
Some 
retrofitting of 
existing meters 
AMR; wide variations 
across DNOs; some 
AMM plans more 
recently; mobile 
phone network  
2008: All customers with main fuses > 63 
A have hourly metering 
2008: In May Vaasan Sähköverkko Oy 
announces AMM plans for 60,000 
customers  
2009: Vattenfall expects all of its 900,000 
meters to support remote reading 
Mandatory hourly metering for 
customers with fuses >63 A 
France 
 
Electronic AMR (handheld); 
plans for AMM 
systems 
1990s: EDF starts installing AMR in small 
businesses and homes (approx. 9 million) 
2008: EDF planning an AMM pilot for 
300,000 homes in 2010 
Regulator planning to publish 
AMM requirements following on 
from commissioned cost benefit 
analysis in 2007 
Source: Villa (2008), Owen and Ward (2006), Ofgem (2006a), ERGEG (2007), Oland (2005), Vigneron 
(2007), PRI (n.d.), Metering.com (2008), NIAUR (2007) 
In countries such as Sweden, France and Finland AMR was initially implemented but plans for AMM 
have since developed. A large-scale pilot project is planned by EDF in France; and although legislation in 
Sweden only requires more frequent electricity readings, AMM is increasingly being adopted by 
 23 
distribution companies.  Technology choice is also a function of context-specific considerations. Prior to 
the trial and roll-out of keypad prepayment metering in Northern Ireland, basic prepayment metering 
was widely used by Northern Ireland Electricity.  One of the main drivers for replacing the prepayment 
system was the decrease in operating costs. Improved functionality also allows for load to be limited 
rather than disconnected which was an important feature in overcoming concerns of the regulator and 
consumer groups over self-disconnection. 
Table 8: Implementation and studies of advanced electricity metering outside Europe 
 Meter Communications Timeline Incentives/Cost 
recovery 
USA: California Interval and some 
retrofitting 
AMM: PLC and radio 
frequency (RF) 
2007/2008: 3 main investor-
owned utilities PG&E, SG&E 
and SCE commencing 
deployment of approx. 12 
million electricity and 5 
million gas meters 
California Public Utilities 
Commission requested 
proposals from utilities and 
authorizes funding for AMI 
Canada: Ontario 
 
Interval AMM: PLC and 
public 
telecommunications; 
open solution 
2007: Target of 800,000 
meters (20%) 
2010: Target of 4.5 million 
meters (100%)  
Cost recovery through 
distribution rates approved 
by Ontario Energy Board  
Australia: Victoria 
 
Interval; Zigbee-
enabled 
AMM  2006: Government 
endorses roll-out to all 
homes and businesses  
2008: Installation of approx. 
2.6 million meters to 
commence 
Cost recovery through 
metering charges regulated 
by Essential Service 
Commission to be collected 
from retailers of all small 
consumers 
India: New Delhi 
 
Prepayment; 
tamper detection 
and load 
limitation 
AMR: PLC  2008: Pilots in New Delhi 
2010: Target of 500,000 
meters (Grinpal Energy 
Management) 
Pilot project initially with 
contract between Grinpal 
and distributors 
India: Andhra Pradesh electronic; 
recalibration of 
old meters for 
small users 
AMR: Satellite 
communications 
from distribution 
feeders; meter 
reading for monthly 
data downloads 
2000: Electronic meters 
installed for high-value 
customers to start with; 
focus on 11-kilovolt feeders 
with high line losses and on 
114 towns for residential 
customers (53% of 
consumption) 
Reduce electricity theft and 
increase revenue 
Lebanon: study for 
Électricité du Liban 
Electromechanical 
and electronic 
AMR Study undertaken in 2003 Minimise losses due to 
theft and fraud 
Source: IT Web (2008); Bhatia and Gulati (2004); Ghajar and Khalife (2003);  
 24 
Table 8 summarises implementation and studies of advanced metering outside Europe.  The largest-
scale recent implementation in California offers an interesting case study in the approaches taken by 
utilities in the region. Southern California Edison (SCE), after its first analysis of smart metering in 2005, 
concluded that available technologies were not cost-effective in their present form (SCE, 2005). Since 
then, SCE has worked with meter manufacturers to improve functionality and to develop an open 
architecture information system that will allow for future communication channels, e.g. cell phones and 
other mobile devices.  Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) in 2005 decided to proceed with a proprietary 
metering system rather than to wait for an open solution (PG&E, 2005).  In the meantime PG&E has 
decided to upgrade its smart metering programme to allow for the integration of more advanced 
automation systems through the home area network (HAN) (PG&E, 2008). 
New Delhi is one example of advanced prepayment and remote reading technology in a developing 
country context.  Although the system planned for New Delhi is described as AMR, there is also some 
two-way communication involved as part of the project, with remote disconnection and reconnection, 
remote switching between credit and prepayment metering and messages sent to residential customers 
from the utility via mobile phone or a display connected to the meter (IT Web, 2008).  The state of 
Andhra Pradesh has also had some experience in improving metering systems, mainly to reduce 
electricity theft and increase revenue.  Electronic meters and remote meter reading instruments were 
installed to improve the accuracy and information flows for industrial, commercial and some residential 
customers.  As a result, transmission and distribution losses were reduced from approximately 38 
percent in 1999 to 26 percent in 2003 (Bhatia and Gulati, 2004). 
A study in Lebanon for Électricité du Liban, the national electricity company investigated the potential of 
AMR to minimise losses due to theft and fraud.  The levels of total losses are approximately 50% - this 
includes both technical and non-technical losses.  The study concludes that a combination of 
electromechanical and electronic meters equipped with RF communication modules should be 
implemented; the electronic meters would account for 14% of total installed meters and would be used 
for large consumption and problematic customers (Ghajar and Khalife, 2003). 
Likely international developments   The international metering landscape is one that is 
constantly changing due to advances in technology and in international experience.  In order to get a 
flavour of what lies ahead in Europe, it is helpful to look at the locations and types of technology trials 
that are currently being undertaken as well as the preliminary plans/ targets that have been announced 
by energy regulators and/or by relevant market actors. 
Some of the main European trials are summarised in Table 9.  Developing metering and billing policies 
that are in line with the EU Energy Services Directive has been a strong driver across the EU for trials and 
studies of smart metering. In countries such as Great Britain and France, the trials follow on from cost 
benefit analyses that have been conducted. In Great Britain in particular, the Energy Demand Reduction 
Pilot is under way to further inform the direction of smart metering policy and to identify if a stronger 
regulatory role is required. 
 25 
 
Table 9: A selection of smart metering technology trials in Europe 
 Technology 
 
Implementation 
Austria 
(electricity) 
AMM systems 2 grid operators; domestic; independent of 
government/regulator (ERGEG, 2007) 
Czech Republic 
(electricity) 
AMM systems; various 
projects 
DNOs; domestic; independent of 
government/regulator (ERGEG, 2007) 
France  
(electricity) 
AMM systems; PLC-based EDF; 300,000 households; March-September 
2010; first stage in 35-million meter roll-out . 
Germany 
(electricity) 
AMM; several data 
communications 
technologies 
RWE (supplier); 100,000 households in one town 
(Muellheim a. d. Ruhr); from mid-2008 for 3 
years. 
 AMM; internet-based 
communication 
Yello (supplier); 1,000 households; to commence 
2008; partnership with Microsoft. 
Great Britain 
(electricity; gas) 
Remotely read meters with 
displays 
EDF (supplier); 3,000 households in London; 
managed by National Energy Action; funded by 
DEFRA. 
(electricity; gas) Remotely read meters; 
smart meters with visual 
displays; display units 
alone; prepayment meters 
“Energy Demand Reduction Pilot”  2007-2010 
managed by Ofgem with 23,000 homes; 
implemented by EDF Energy, E.ON UK, Scottish & 
Southern Energy, ScottishPower (suppliers); 
funded by BERR, DEFRA and match-funded by 
suppliers. 
(electricity; gas; 
water) 
Remote collection and 
access to metering data; 
communications solutions 
site-specific 
Carbon Trust 2004-2006; 582 advanced meters in 
SMEs across UK 
Ireland 
(electricity) 
AMM; system architecture 
to be determined 
ESB Networks managed by Commission for 
Energy Regulation; 25,000 homes in varied 
geographic locations from April 2008. 
Spain 
(electricity initially) 
AMM; PLC-based; open and 
non-proprietary system 
architecture 
Small-scale testing mid-2007 by Iberdrola in LV 
network; 2007-2009 further preparations with 
deployment from 2009 (Powerline Related 
Intelligent Metering Evolution – PRIME) 
Source: Carbon Trust (2007), CER (2008), ERGEG (2007), PRIME (2008), Verivox (2008), Vigneron (2007), 
Yello Strom (2008). 
 26 
 
In other countries such as Ireland and Spain, the first stages of deployment are being used as a means to 
inform later stages.  The large-scale pilot in Ireland follows on from a qualitative review of smart 
metering by the regulator and is an exercise in determining meter design, system architecture and 
functionality through engagement with the network operator, suppliers and other stakeholders.  A full 
cost-benefit analysis will be conducted based on the results of the pilot.  The Irish regulator is working 
closely with the regulator in Northern Ireland to ensure that supplier competition in the all-island 
market will not be inhibited by a lack of interoperability (CER, 2008). 
In Germany, the two main trials that have been announced to date are being undertaken by two 
suppliers, RWE and Yello.  In contrast to other European countries, the trials in Germany, Austria and the 
Czech Republic are taking place independently of the government and/or the regulator. 
Table 10: Smart metering projections for Europe 
 Smart Metering 
Target 
Comments 
Denmark 13% by 2010  
Finland 60% by 2015  
Ireland 
(electricity) 
100% by 2012 Large-scale pilot as part of deployment in 
2008(AMM) 
Latvia 22% expected by 2012  
Netherlands 
(electricity and gas) 
100% by 2014 Due to commence mid-2008 w/ 2-yearly 
assessment (AMM) 
Norway 100% by 2013  Possible deadline for implementation 
Spain 
(electricity) 
65% by 2015; 100% by 
2019 
Due to commence deployment 2009 (AMM) 
United Kingdom 100% by 2018 Medium and large businesses to be targeted 
first; further consultation on small business and 
domestic during 2008 
Source: ERGEG (2007), CER (2007), BERR (2008a). 
The metering survey undertaken by the European Regulators Group for Electricity and Gas (ERGEG, 
2007) gives an idea of what to expect in Europe over the next 5 to 10 years in countries where activity in 
smart metering is currently in its early stages.  Table 10 summarises smart metering targets for these 
countries; reaching the targets will in many cases depend on the outcomes of ongoing trials.  Details on 
 27 
the functionalities and applications of future smart meter installation from the survey were lacking; 
drawing conclusions on technology differences is therefore difficult and highlights continuing 
uncertainty in Europe. 
5 Economic assessment of smart metering 
Regardless of their level of intelligence, meters provide information generally for billing purposes and 
they allow the end-user to interact with other market actors in the supply chain.  The electricity sector 
has traditionally been supply-oriented.  Consequently, electricity metering for small users in particular 
has been based on very limited information on consumption, manual reading of this information and a 
very slow and one-way interaction between the meter and the meter reader. 
The range of new functions offered by a smart metering infrastructure improves the information 
available and expands the potential for interaction; and the end-user is given the opportunity to become 
a more active participant in the market for electricity. The economic and social implications of these 
changes are widespread and differ according to how smart metering is implemented. In this section we 
will take a closer look at smart metering functionality and its application; we will then discuss the main 
categories of costs and benefits, what they are sensitive to and how they are distributed. 
5.1 New functionality and its application 
Although there is no single definition for a smart meter, the most common interpretation implies that 
the meter device itself is advanced and that it is supported by a two-way communications system. There 
is a wide range of functions that can fall under this definition. Using the recent in-depth national 
Australian study on smart meter functionality as a basis (NERA, 2007b), Table 11 divides the range of 
new functions into two main categories: those that are considered ‘core’ and those that are ‘additional’ 
features. 
Table 11: ‘Core’ and ‘additional’ smart meter functions and applications 
 Function Application 
Core 
Measurement Half-hourly measurement and 
recording 
Load profile measurement; accurate billing; basis 
for time-differentiated tariffs 
 Remote reading (weekly) Accurate billing 
 Local reading by meter reader or 
end-user 
Back up in case of communications failure; 
customer awareness 
 Remote time synchronization Ensure clock accuracy so that readings 
correspond to actual time-of-use 
Security Communications and data Data is securely transmitted from and to the 
 28 
security meter; two-way communications 
 Tamper detection Communication of tampering remotely 
Load 
management 
Support existing load 
management arrangements 
Allows continuation of load control via broadcast 
of turn-on/turn-off commands, e.g. for some 
Economy 7 users in the UK 
Additional 
Measurement Daily remote reading More timely information on energy usage; 
potential for greater demand response 
 Power factor measurement Monitoring of power factor and targeted 
improvements 
 Import/export metering Facilitates micro-generation 
Switching Remote 
connection/disconnection 
Facilitates supplier switching 
 Remote switch between credit 
and prepayment 
Greater customer flexibility 
Load 
management 
Supply capacity control Emergency limits following outages; contractual 
limits on supply to customers 
 Interface with load control 
technology and smart appliances 
(white goods), e.g. through HAN 
Direct load control through an open standard 
platform (the HAN) 
Quality Detection and notification of 
supply losses and outages 
Faster outage detection; improved quality of 
service data 
Customer 
interaction 
Interface to HAN  Potential for integrated additional services e.g. 
security, fire safety (see Figure 4) 
 In-home display device Customers awareness; instantaneous 
information 
 Interface for other metered data 
(gas, heat, water) 
Integration of other utilities with the existing 
local communications infrastructure 
Configurability Remote reconfiguration Settings e.g. times for load control, tariffs, and 
supply capacity control can be changed remotely 
Source: Based on NERA, 2007b 
 
The ‘core’ set of features creates the foundation for price-responsive tariffs, accurate billing, greater 
customer awareness and secure two-way communications. The additional functions could increase the 
 29 
potential for demand response by providing more frequent information on energy usage and improving 
how the customer interacts with and responds to this information through, for example, the HAN. 
5.2 Costs of smart metering  
The three main cost categories for smart metering are as follows: 
1. Meters 
2. Installation 
3. Communications and data systems 
We will deal with each of these categories in turn and will discuss how each category may be affected by 
differences in roll-out strategies. Finally we will consider the role of stranded costs. 
Meter costs Adding functionality increases the capital costs of metering. Table 12 gives an 
overview of meter purchase costs from two recent studies in Great Britain (Frontier Economics, 2007a; 
Owen and Ward, 2007). The costs refer to the initial purchase cost of the meter devices, from an 
electromechanical meter to a relatively advanced smart electricity meter. 
The costs of basic prepayment meters are substantially higher for both electricity and gas than their 
credit counterparts. In fact, innovation in metering for prepayment customers has been a strong driver 
for more advanced meters as in the case of Northern Ireland. There is a wide range of purchase costs for 
both smart electricity and smart gas meters depending on the additional features that are included. For 
example, the addition of a separate visual display adds £15 to the base purchase cost of the meter in the 
Frontier study. 
Table 13 gives a breakdown of the additional lifetime cost of providing certain functions in the meter 
itself based on the Australian national study (NERA, 2007b). As can be seen from the table, there are a 
number of functions that do not require any additions to the meter; and the most significant cost 
addition is providing an in-home display device, followed by providing an interface for other utilities. 
Although there are no additional meter costs involved in adding functions such as daily remote reading 
and export/import metering, there are other cost categories which are affected, in particular the IT 
system and management costs associated with an increase in data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 30 
Table 12: Meter purchase costs in Great Britain 2007 
METER/DEVICE 
TYPE 
PURCHASE 
COST 
FEATURES 
 
STUDY 
Electromechanical/basic prepayment 
Domestic credit 
electricity 
£7-8  Owen and Ward, 
2007 
Domestic key 
prepayment electricity 
£45-50  
Domestic credit gas £18-20  
Domestic prepayment 
gas 
£75-100  
Real-time electricity 
display 
£15  Frontier Economics, 
2007a  
Smart meter 
Domestic electricity  £25-35 Core plus remote switch 
credit/prepayment 
Owen and Ward, 
2007  
£72-80 Core plus separate visual 
display; remote 
connect/disconnect; remote 
switch credit/prepayment; 
import/export metering 
Frontier Economics, 
2007a  
Domestic gas £40-60 
(£70-100) 
Core (includes 
credit/prepayment switch) 
Owen and Ward, 
2007  
 £73-103 Same as second domestic 
electricity smart meter 
Frontier Economics, 
2007a  
Source: Owen and Ward, 2007; Frontier Economics, 2007a 
The lifetime costs of the meters are sensitive to the discount rate chosen and the assumed lifetime of 
the meter. The discount rate reflects the perspective of the analysis, i.e. if it is a business case analysis, 
the discount rate is commercial and based on the cost of capital; a lower discount rate is chosen to 
assess the present value to society of the meter and other costs.  Smart meters have a shorter technical 
life than traditional electromechanical meters; a lifetime of 15 years is typically assumed (NERA, 2007b; 
Carbon Trust, 2007) compared with a 20-year useful (i.e. certified) lifetime for traditional meters 
(Frontier Economics, 2007). 
 
 31 
Table 13: Present value costs of adding functionality to smart meters in Australia 2007 
 PRESENT VALUE COST (PER METER) IN 
2007 AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS  
 
Function Low estimate High estimate Main 
assumptions 
Remote reading (daily) 0 0 1. 15-year time 
period 
2. From 2014 
3. 8% discount rate 
(6.5% and 9.5% 
for sensitivity 
testing) 
4. 9.64 million 
customers 
 
Export/import metering 0 $0.53 
Remote 
connect/disconnect 
$7.07 $11.57 
Supply capacity control 0 0 
Interface to HAN $9.70 $12.13 
In-home display $18.19 $84.89 
Interface for gas and 
water meters 
$10.91 $13.34 
Loss of supply and 
outage detection 
0 0 
Remote reconfiguration 0 0 
Source: NERA, 2007b 
The responsibility for and the speed of the meter roll-out may have an impact on meter costs.  In theory 
due to economies of scale, larger scale roll-outs where, for example, one party (i.e. a DNO) is 
responsible for meter purchasing in a geographic area have greater potential to reduce meter unit costs 
than smaller scale roll-outs. Consultations with meter vendors in Australia, however, indicated that costs 
per meter are unlikely to fall considerably for volumes above 250,000 (NERA, 2008, p. 40). The speed of 
the roll-out also affects the number of meters purchased each year; economies of scale could be 
achieved with an accelerated roll-out (Frontier Economics, 2007a). 
 Installation costs The annual installation costs for meters capable of AMR and AMM from a 2006 
analysis by Ofgem are outlined in Table 14. The existing cap on total annual metering charges for 
domestic electricity credit meters is £1.12 in Great Britain (Ofgem, 2006b); the installation costs alone 
for the simple and sophisticated electricity credit meters in Table 11 are greater than the price cap. 
 
 
 
 32 
Table 14: Metering installation costs in Great Britain 
SMART METER TYPE 
(DOMESTIC) 
INSTALLATION 
COST/YEAR 
MAIN ASSUMPTIONS 
‘Simple’ electricity credit  £1.17 1. Simple: AMR 
2. Sophisticated: AMM with core smart 
functions  
3. 10% discount rate 
4. 15-year asset life 
5. Large-scale instantaneous roll-out 
‘Simple’ gas credit   £1.01 
‘Sophisticated’ electricity 
credit 
£1.60 
‘Sophisticated’ gas credit  £1.01 
Source: Ofgem, 2006a 
Installation costs are affected by differences in roll-out schedules.  For example if metering systems are 
deployed on a new and replacement basis only, that is when new and renovated buildings require meter 
installation and when existing meters need to be replaced13, lifetime installation costs are relatively low.  
Accelerating the roll-out schedule increases the costs of installation due to an increase in the number of 
physical installations over a shorter period of time. The coordination of the roll-out has an impact on the 
magnitude of this cost increase. If the roll-out is coordinated by region, travel time between sites can be 
minimised; and if the roll-out is coordinated so that electricity and gas meters are installed 
simultaneously, the number of site visits can be reduced (Frontier Economics, 2007a). 
 Communications and data systems Difficulties in estimating cost differences between 
communications options have been cited as a source of uncertainty in a number of smart metering 
studies (e.g. Ofgem, 2006a; Frontier, 2007a).  A detailed 2005 study in Victoria, Australia investigates 
some of the factors influencing the cost-effectiveness of communications technology choice (CRA, 
2005); the study was followed by technology trials conducted on behalf of the Victorian government 
(DPI, 2007).  The results of the study and trials indicate that customer density is a particularly important 
factor in determining technology choice.  When customer density is low, in rural and remote areas, 
Power Line Carrier tends to be cost-effective even though the rates of data communication are slower 
relative to other solutions.  Mesh radio, where meters are used as repeaters in a mesh configuration, is 
more suitable and cost-effective in areas of high customer density. 
The likelihood of future upgrades to the communications network is another important factor. In the 
2005 Victoria study, the costs of wireless networks was found to be prohibitively high because of the 
                                                          
13
As an example, the replacement rate for electricity and gas meters in Great Britain is approximately 5% per 
annum (DTI, 2006, p. 21). 
 33 
assumption that existing technology is expected to be replaced in the short to medium term. This would 
require meter and network upgrades, substantially adding to costs (CRA, 2005). 
Stranded assets When an existing meter is replaced before replacement is required, the value 
inherent in the meter is lost as it is unlikely to be re-used elsewhere. The costs associated with stranding 
can be a significant barrier to roll-out; and in Great Britain this additional cost category falls on the 
supplier. The speed of any roll-out affects the extent of asset stranding; accelerating roll-out above the 
annual replacement rate increases stranded costs. The business case for smart metering from a 
supplier’s perspective must incorporate these costs; based on the 2001 price control review for network 
operators in GB, the Carbon Trust derived prices for stranding of electricity meters as £15 and gas as £17 
(Carbon Trust, 2007). 
Investigating the case for smart metering from a country or regional perspective does not require 
inclusion of costs associated with the redundancy of the existing stock of traditional meters. As sunk 
costs, they are not relevant to the analysis of whether to proceed with a roll-out or not (NERA, 2008). 
The UK-wide analysis conducted by the Carbon Trust excludes these costs as they imply no net cost to 
the UK; they are, however, included in the sensitivity analysis and the overall effect is minimal (Carbon 
Trust, 2007). 
The risk of stranded assets also applies to any new meters installed. Suppliers in the UK have often been 
reluctant to install smart meters due to the risk that they may become redundant or lose some of their 
value if a customer chooses to switch supplier. This risk can be reduced in a number of ways: Suppliers 
can enter into churn contracts with each other to guarantee continued use of the meter; they can offer 
customers longer supply contracts; and interoperability standards can be put in place, an area that 
Ofgem is currently addressing (Carbon Trust, 2007; Ofgem 2006b). 
5.3 Benefits of smart metering 
The benefits of smart metering can be divided into two main categories: operational benefits and 
demand response (DR) benefits. As is the case when looking at the costs of meters and metering 
systems, the magnitude of benefits is influenced by a number of factors, including the level of 
functionality, deployment speed, coordination and behavioural change.  
Table 15 gives an overview of various smart metering functions and the corresponding net benefit per 
meter from the recent national Australian study (NERA, 2007b). This time, the functions are divided by 
benefit category; study assumptions are briefly summarised. The assessment is based on identifying the 
additional benefit of adding each increment of functionality to the meter and subtracting the additional 
cost; this gives the net benefit per meter for each function listed. Where the additional cost outweighs 
the benefit, the net benefit is negative; the net benefit is positive when the additional benefit outweighs 
the cost. 
 
 34 
 
 
Table 15: Net benefits by function for smart electricity metering in Australia 
BENEFIT 
CATEGORY 
FUNCTION NET BENEFITS 
P/METER 
(LOWER AND UPPER) IN 
AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS 
(2007) 
ASSUMPTIONS 
Operational/
DR 
Remote reading (daily) -$4.51 $15.88 1. DNO-led roll-
out 
2. 15-year 
evaluation 
period from 
2014 
3. 8% discount 
rate (6.5% and 
9.5% for 
sensitivity 
testing) 
4. 9.64 million 
domestic 
electricity 
customers 
Operational Export/import metering $4.06 $4.59 
Remote connect/disconnect $7.09 $15.59 
Supply capacity control -$4.68 -$2.44 
Interface to gas and water meters -$29.12 -$19.25 
Quality of supply recording -$6.28 $9.75 
Loss of supply and outage detection $6.70 $8.04 
Remote reconfiguration $14.17 $15.05 
DR Interface for other load control devices -$24.24 $57.89 
In-home display -$73.51 -$18.19 
Interface to HAN -$44.59 $75.92 
Note: £1 = $2.39 at annual average exchange rate for 2007 (Bank of England Statistics) 
Source: NERA, 2007b 
The range between lower and upper estimates of net benefits depends on assumptions made for each 
function. For instance, in the case of the interface to the HAN and load control devices, these functions 
could potentially contribute the highest net benefits per meter; however the additional benefits depend 
on assumed customer participation rates and corresponding demand response.    Where these 
assumptions are more conservative, the additional costs of adding these interfaces could outweigh the 
benefits. The most convincing additions from this evidence are daily remote reading, export/import 
metering, remote connection/disconnection/configuration and loss of supply/outage detection.  
Operational benefits The main operational benefits of increased functionality for network 
companies and suppliers are a result of the overall improvement in the efficiency of metering services. 
How these benefits are distributed depends on industry structure at the time of deployment. We will 
consider this in more detail in the next section. The avoided cost of meter reading is one of the most 
 35 
significant operational benefits and is facilitated by the remote reading function. Deployment speed has 
an impact on this and other operational benefits; in general, slower deployment can have an adverse 
effect on total benefits. 
With meter reading costs a slower roll-out leads to a more costly metering transition period. For 
example, if roll-out is on a new and replacement basis, the gradually decreasing density of remaining 
traditional meters will result in a higher cost per meter read over a longer period of time. If the roll-out 
can be regionally coordinated, it may be possible to increase or keep constant the density of traditional 
meters; the costs of managing the traditional meter network may fall and the benefits of reduced meter 
reading costs can be maximised (Frontier Economics, 2007a). 
On the other hand, there may be an option value associated with waiting to invest if investing now will 
result in lock-in to a particular type of inferior technology. We will discuss this in section 5 when we look 
more closely at a range of international cost benefit studies and the potential for innovation and future 
cost reductions. 
Better outage detection, faster response times to outages, improved quality of supply recording and 
accurate billing also improve the efficiency of metering services. The main benefits to the network and 
supplier stem from the reduction in customer service costs due to a lower level of customer complaints. 
Non-technical loss reduction, losses due to theft for instance, can also be an important benefit. Its 
magnitude depends on country context; where electricity theft has been an important issue, the 
potential to reduce losses may be a strong driver for smart metering deployment. 
The benefits of a more efficient service and a greater level of choice are ultimately passed on to the 
customer. Operationally, smart meters offer customers more choice in terms of payment options (e.g. 
easier switching between credit and prepayment to manage debt), improved consumption information, 
and they facilitate micro-generation. Whether the metering of electricity generated in the home is a 
benefit to the customer or the network depends on who was responsible for this metering prior to the 
roll-out of smart meters (NERA, 2008). 
Demand response benefits Smart meters can influence customer demand in a number of ways: 
first, by facilitating direct load control of appliances; second, by facilitating the introduction of time-
varying prices; and third, by providing additional consumption information either via the meter, external 
display or directly from the supplier. Direct load control and time-varying prices have the potential to 
shift consumption from peak to off-peak periods; and time-varying prices and information may lead to 
changes in average consumption levels. 
Demand response impacts of smart metering depend on the tariffs offered by suppliers, the number of 
customers that avail of new tariffs and/or load control options, and the change in customer demand in 
response to new tariffs.  As we saw in Table 15, the net benefits of demand response functions are 
subject to a greater amount of uncertainty than the operational functions of smart metering. Much of 
this is due to the need for customer acceptance and behavioural change. 
 36 
Changes in demand can have a number of benefits for networks, suppliers, the customer and society. 
Shifting consumption from peak to off-peak periods may defer the need for peak network investment; 
this shift may also defer investment in peak generating capacity. More cost-reflective pricing may also 
help suppliers to minimise their hedging costs, i.e. the premium over wholesale prices that suppliers 
typically incur to fix the price they pay for energy (KPMG, 2007). The impact on carbon emissions 
depends on whether there is an overall reduction in demand; it also depends on the carbon intensities 
of marginal plants during peak and off-peak periods (Frontier Economics, 2007a). 
5.4 Market models 
There are two predominant metering market models in Europe: the regulated model and the liberalised 
model, although there are many variations between countries as we saw in section 2.  The choice of 
market model has an impact on the way in which costs and benefits are distributed across the supply 
chain; this can have a significant influence on the decision of whether and how to implement smart 
metering. From a technology diffusion perspective, Zhang and Nuttall (2007) show that rolling out smart 
meters on a random and geographically dispersed basis and encouraging competition between suppliers 
in the metering market can be effective strategies. From a cost-benefit perspective, Frontier Economics 
(2007a) shows that there are significant cost savings from a co-ordinated roll-out, both on a geographic 
and dual-fuel basis. 
In Great Britain and Australia, this debate has been central to smart metering policy.  Cost benefit 
analyses that compare roll-out scenarios based on different metering market models have been 
undertaken in both countries to guide policymaking. BERR’s 2008 analysis (BERR, 2008b) compares two 
market models quantitatively: a mandated supplier-led rollout and a mandated regional franchise 
rollout. Frontier Economics (2007a) investigates the same market models with slightly different 
assumptions. Market model scenarios are also central to the recent national Australian smart metering 
study (NERA, 2008). Three scenarios are considered quantitatively: a distributor-led rollout; a supplier-
led rollout; and a centralised communications system as part of a supplier-led rollout.  Table 16 
compares a selection of results from the three studies. 
From Table 16 we can see that the choice of market model has an impact on total costs and final net 
present value. Both studies of GB anticipate lower total costs for similar rollout programmes when the 
responsibility for delivery of smart metering services lies with a regional franchisee. The franchisees 
would be selected through a tendering process; once selected they would purchase metering services 
via competitive tendering at the regional level. Both scenarios in the Frontier study result in an overall 
net benefit, although the size of the net benefit under the regional franchise model is just over 6 times 
that under the supplier-led model. Neither of the BERR scenarios results in a net benefit, although the 
size of the net cost is slightly less under the regional franchise model. 
 
 
 37 
Table 16: Total smart metering costs and NPV by market model 
MARKET 
MODEL 
TECHNOLOGY ROLLOUT TOTAL COSTS FINAL NPV 
BERR, 2008b 
Supplier-led AMM (core 
functions): all 
domestic electricity 
and gas 
10-year: domestic 
and micro 
businesses 
£13.4bn £-1.3bn 
Regional 
franchise 
10-year: domestic 
and micro 
businesses 
£12.7bn £-1.0 
Frontier Economics, 2007a 
Supplier-led AMM (core plus 
advanced): 28 million 
electricity; 22 million 
gas 
10-year: domestic 
and small business 
£6.7bn 
(incremental) 
£546m 
Regional 
franchise 
7-year: domestic 
and small business 
£6.1bn 
(incremental) 
£3.5bn 
NERA, 2008 
Distributor-led AMM (without HAN): 
10 million electricity 
meters  
6-year: domestic $2.7bn to $4.3bn  
(incremental) 
$179m to $3.9bn 
Supplier-led $3.6bn to $6.0bn $-1.9bn to $2.4bn 
Centralised 
communications 
$3.3bn to $5.6bn $-1.5bn to $2.7bn 
Note: £1 = $2.39 at annual average spot exchange rate for 2007 (Bank of England Statistics) 
In the Australian study, there is a clear contrast between the regulated and liberalised models: the 
distributor-led rollout relies on the regulatory framework to provide incentives for least cost delivery; 
and the supplier-led rollout relies on competition between retailers to provide incentives for efficiency. 
The results indicate that total costs are lower and potential net benefits higher under the distributor-led 
scenario; when the communications system is provided by a centralised agency, costs are lower and 
potential net benefits higher than under the full supplier-led scenario. BERR considers the distributor-led 
rollout qualitatively in its 2008 assessment; a number of concerns are raised however surrounding 
restricted technology choice, innovation and efficiency. In addition, NERA concludes that all viable 
alternatives to a regulated model should be considered because of the limited information basis 
available for regulators to benchmark efficient costs for smart metering rollouts. The franchise model is 
suggested as a model that should be considered in more detail as it removes the need for regulatory 
review of technical infrastructure options (NERA, 2008). 
 38 
As well as differences in costs and overall net benefits across market model scenarios, there are 
differences in how these costs are allocated due to changes in responsibilities. Table 17 compares the 
two extremes of a distributor-led (regulated) and supplier-led (liberalised) rollout according to the 
allocation of costs. 
Under the distributor-led model, the DNO can recover some of the costs through regulated charges 
which are then passed on to the customer; when the model is supplier-led, costs are also ultimately 
passed on to the customer but in a competitive setting. Standards for meters, communications and data 
become even more crucial in a competitive environment. The risks of investing without having standards 
in place can be prohibitively high; the supplier cannot be sure that the investment will not become 
stranded, if, for example, a customer switches to another supplier who is not in a position to or does not 
agree to use the same technology (Wissner and Growitsch, 2007). 
Table 17: Allocation of smart metering costs between market model scenarios 
 DISTRIBUTOR SUPPLIER MARKET OPERATOR 
Distributor-led Meters Supplier systems Market meter & data 
transactions management 
Meter data & 
communications 
management 
  
Communications   
Distributor systems   
Supplier-led Distributor systems Meters Market meter & data 
transactions management 
 Meter data & 
communications 
management 
 
 Communications  
Source: Adapted from NERA (2008) 
Although one party incurs the majority of the costs in both distributor-led and supplier-led scenarios, 
there is a wide range of benefits for all market actors. Table 18 gives an overview of the main benefits 
for each actor regardless of the market model adopted. 
 
 
 
 39 
Table 18: Allocation of benefits independent of market model scenario 
Customer/Society 
Bill savings from reducing and/or shifting consumption 
Accurate billing: better customer service 
Increased quality of service 
Easier switching of supplier 
Reduction in carbon emissions  
Avoided investment in peak generation capacity 
Supplier 
Accurate information for billing purposes; fewer complaints 
Reduction in unpaid bills 
Distribution 
Avoided peak investment 
Reduced technical and non-technical (theft) losses 
Transmission 
Avoided peak investment 
 
Reduced meter reading costs are not included in the table. This important operational benefit of smart 
metering is allocated to the party responsible for meters and meter data and communications 
management; it therefore depends on the given market model. 
6 International evidence on the costs and benefits of smart metering 
There is rarely a straightforward answer to the question of whether the benefits of smart metering 
outweigh the costs or vice versa.  This is not only due to differences in the types of available metering 
systems and functionality but also to context-specific deployment drivers and questions, market 
structure, and methodology in analysing the costs and benefits.  In this section, we assess the cost-
benefit analyses conducted internationally.  We first present an overview of the results of a number of 
studies; we then turn our attention to some of the interesting details of these analyses in terms of the 
main categories of costs and benefits. 
 40 
6.1  International overview 
The outcomes of international smart metering studies depend on several factors; the institutional actors 
involved, the main objectives at the outset of the study, the methodology used and the structure of the 
metering market all have an impact on findings and subsequent policies.  Table 19 gives an overview of 
some recent international cost-benefit analyses, including GB studies, according to these criteria. 
The institutional actors involved and their degree of involvement has had an impact on the definition of 
objectives for the studies and as a result the methodology used.  In all cases, the regulator and/or a 
relevant government department have been involved in either conducting or requesting studies to be 
conducted. 
In California, the regulator requested AMI deployment plans from all investor-owned utilities in order to 
increase the level of demand response in the state; avoiding another electricity crisis and controlling 
peak consumption were the main policy aims. A more exploratory approach was undertaken in Great 
Britain, the Netherlands, Norway and in the national Australian study to identify the full range of costs 
and benefits and to assess any barriers to implementation.  In France, the analysis focused on 
investigating technology options for flexible demand and in providing more information to consumers.  
The existing case for distribution companies to implement advanced metering solutions is investigated; 
the costs and benefits for suppliers and energy producers are also evaluated. 
In Ontario by contrast, the government set a target for full implementation of smart metering in the 
province and requested the regulator to prepare an implementation plan to achieve this target.  The 
methodology of the study was affected by this more prescriptive approach: it is assumed at the outset 
that smart metering will proceed and the focus is on the operational costs and benefits rather than on 
the wider range of benefits to the customer and economy.  In Victoria, the analysis was also narrowly 
defined by the government to assess the case for mandating two-way communications as part of an 
interval meter roll-out that had previously been decided upon. 
Where market structure is concerned, methodology is affected by the need to focus on the actor 
responsible for making investment decisions.  For example, in the French analysis the business case for 
distribution companies is central, whereas in Great Britain the focus is on the supplier business case. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 41 
Table 19: Overview of international smart metering cost benefit analyses 
 Institutional 
actors 
Objectives Methodology 
 
Market structure 
Great Britain: Ofgem, 
2006a 
(domestic electricity 
and gas) 
Ofgem (regulator) Identify costs and 
benefits to inform 
policy direction 
-Business case for supplier 
-Social CBA: 
Supplier, network and 
customers 
Competitive metering market: 
supplier decides who to engage for 
installation and operation 
Great Britain: 
BERR, 2008b 
(domestic electricity 
and gas) 
BERR (government 
department) 
Assess the case for 
government 
intervention in 
encouraging smart 
meter roll-out 
-Social CBA: 
Consumer, supplier, other 
As above; regional franchise model 
assessed as alternative policy option 
France:  
Capgemini, 2007 
(electricity and gas) 
Commission for the 
Regulation of 
Energy (regulator) 
Assess range of meter 
technologies for more 
flexible demand and 
improved information 
-Business case for DSO 
-Producer, Distribution, 
Supply analysis 
Regulated metering market: DSO 
responsible for all services 
Netherlands: 
SenterNovem, 2005 
(domestic electricity 
and gas) 
Ministry of the 
Economy 
Assess how costs and 
benefits differ across 
actors; understand 
how implementation 
process should 
develop 
-Social CBA: 
Households, metering 
companies, grid operators, 
suppliers, producers, 
national 
authorities/environment 
Competition in meter provision and 
meter services (at time of CBA): 
customer decides who to engage for 
installation and operation 
Norway: 
Econ, 2007 
Norwegian Water 
Resources and 
Energy Directorate 
(regulator; part of 
Ministry of 
Petroleum & 
Energy) 
Decide whether to set 
a target date for 
implementation or 
offer economic 
incentives 
-Social CBA: 
Suppliers, generators, 
measurement/balancing, 
consumers, network firms 
Regulated metering market: DNO 
responsible for all services 
Ontario: 
OEB, 2005 
(domestic electricity) 
Government and 
Ontario Energy 
Board (regulator) 
Strategy for achieving 
government target of 
full smart meter 
implementation 
-Overview of costs and 
benefits 
-Only operational benefits 
of meter reading 
quantified 
Regulated metering market: DNO 
responsible for all services 
Victoria: 
CRA, 2005 
(electricity) 
Department of 
Infrastructure – 
Energy and Security 
Division 
Decide if two-way 
communications 
should be mandated 
as part of meter roll-
out 
- Analysis of incremental 
costs and benefits of 
adding communications to 
interval meters 
- Supplier/network 
benefits quantified only 
DNO responsible for roll-out of 
meters; Retailer responsible for 
meter service and data provision 
Australia: 
NERA, 2008: 
Overview Report 
Ministerial Council 
on Energy 
Phase I: Incremental 
assessment of 
functionalities 
Phase II: 
Cost benefit analysis of 
roll-out by jurisdiction 
In-depth studies of: 
-Consumer Impacts 
-Retailer Impacts 
-Network Impacts 
-Economic Impacts 
-Allocation of costs 
 
Metering arrangements for smaller 
customers regulated at state level; 
DNO or retailer responsible for 
metering – mainly DNOs for 
purchase and installation 
California:  
PG&E, 2005 
California Public 
Utilities 
Cost-effective 
deployment plan for 
-Utility business case 
analysis 
Integrated utility (retail and T&D) 
 42 
(electricity and gas) Commission greater demand 
response 
California:  
SCE, 2005 
SCE, 2007 
(electricity) 
California Public 
Utilities 
Commission 
Cost-effective 
deployment plan for 
greater demand 
response 
-Utility business case 
analysis 
Integrated utility 
(retail and T&D) 
 
Table 20 presents some of the main findings and conclusions for the same studies.  For many of the 
studies, the benefits of smart metering outweigh the costs only when the analysis is extended to include 
wider benefits, particularly those to the customer.  The Dutch study, for example, finds that there is a 
net gain for society as a whole which is strongly underpinned by significant benefits to households.  The 
costs for all other actors in the market, however, outweigh the benefits. This raises the question of how 
much consumers would be willing to pay for these benefits; and this is an area that requires further 
study. 
Table 20: Findings of international smart metering cost benefit analyses 
 Main findings 
 
Conclusions 
Great Britain: Ofgem, 
2006a  
(domestic electricity 
and gas) 
-Business case not positive for a simple or 
sophisticated meter 
-Sophisticated meter gives net benefit under 
customer CBA (load and peak demand 
reductions) 
Competition in metering is the best way 
forward; more work on removing barriers and 
forming standards required. 
Great Britain: 
BERR, 2008b 
(domestic electricity 
and gas) 
-Mandated 10-year AMR roll-out only smart 
meter option with positive NPV (central 
assumptions) 
-Highest annual cost per meter under 
mandated 10-year AMM roll-out with regional 
franchise model 
Further work is necessary to refine the impact 
assessment, particularly re: treatment of risk, 
market structures, technology functionality 
and communications. 
France:  
Capgemini, 2007 
(electricity and gas) 
-Negative net benefit for all scenarios for DSO 
-Positive net benefit for more advanced 
systems looking at entire value chain from 
generation to supply  
For customer and in terms of overall benefits, 
most advanced technology scenario is best; 
regulator expected to publish requirements 
for AMM soon. 
Netherlands: 
SenterNovem, 2005 
(domestic electricity 
and gas) 
-Positive net benefit for society as a whole 
-Household benefits significantly outweigh 
costs 
-Costs for all other actors outweigh benefits 
Large-scale implementation will not happen 
without government intervention 
Norway: -Negative net annual benefit (approx. 120NOK Network firms biggest beneficiaries followed 
by customers; best to set a deadline for 
 43 
Econ, 2007 per meter)*;  
 
installation 
Ontario: 
OEB, 2005 
(domestic electricity) 
-Incremental monthly cost of $3-4 per meter 
for residential customers** 
  
Phased deployment recommended starting 
with customers with peak 
demand > 200kW 
Victoria: 
CRA, 2005 
(electricity) 
-Net benefit for accelerated roll-out positive 
except when wireless communications used 
-Net benefit negative for slower roll-out with 
small customers on new and replacement 
basis only 
Accelerated roll-out with advanced 
communications recommended 
Australia: 
NERA, 2008: 
Overview Report 
 
-Positive net benefit for distributor-led roll-out 
under minimum and maximum estimates 
-Negative net benefit for retailer-led roll-out 
under minimum estimates; and positive for 
maximum 
 
Results appear to indicate national roll-out 
could be justified on avoided meter costs and 
business efficiencies alone; MCE to develop 
recommendations on the basis of the study 
California:  
PG&E, 2005 
(electricity and gas) 
-Operational and demand response benefits 
outweigh costs  
Proceed with deployment; application 
approved July 2006 for 5.1 million electric 
meters and 4.2 million gas – upgrade 
application filed December 2007 
California:  
SCE, 2005 
SCE, 2007 
(electricity) 
-2005 analysis: technology not sophisticated 
enough to proceed 
-2007 analysis: open architecture system 
developed: benefits outweigh costs  
Deployment of open architecture system 
compatible with different communications 
channels and interface with home area 
network; application filed July 2007 and 
waiting approval (as of August 2008) for 5.3 
million electric meters 
*£1 = 11.7 NOK at annual average spot exchange rate 2007 ** £1 = $2.2 at annual average spot exchange rate 
2005 (Bank of England Statistics). 
A similar conclusion was drawn in the French analysis looking at the entire value chain from generation 
to supply and in Ofgem’s analysis for Great Britain at the difference between the business case for the 
supplier and the social cost benefit analysis.  These findings suggest that there may be a market failure 
due to split incentives for investment in smart metering.  Where the benefits to the customer and in 
some cases to the networks are not incorporated into the decision of whether or not to invest, some 
type of intervention in the market or further work to remove barriers may be necessary. This may also 
suggest that DNOs should be responsible for collecting finance for smart meters through regulated 
charges. 
 44 
The basic methodology for assessing the net benefit of a smart metering project is similar across studies.  
Where the aim is to conduct a financial analysis to determine if the project will be profitable to the party 
responsible for installing and maintaining the meters, the calculation is based on the following: 
Net benefit = (Capex + Opex) – Financial benefits  (Eq. 1) 
All cost and benefit categories are calculated as financial flows over the project lifetime using a discount 
rate based on the cost of capital appropriate for the company in question.  Values can thus be expressed 
in present value terms.  
Where the aim of the analysis is to determine the broader social impact of the smart metering project, 
the calculation becomes: 
Net social benefit = ((Capex + Opex)+ Other Costs14) – (Financial + Consumer + Other benefits15)  (Eq. 2) 
In conducting a social cost benefit analysis, a social discount rate is used to reflect the opportunity cost 
of capital to society as a whole.  The higher the discount rate, the more the value of future costs and 
benefits will be deflated.   
Changes in technology and cost reductions are constantly occurring in the metering industry and even 
within the same region this has led to marked differences in approaches.  In California, for example, the 
paths of PG&E and SCE diverged from the outset: in 2006 the CPUC authorised funding of $1.74 billion 
for PG&E to proceed with its deployment plan even though technological barriers, i.e. the lack of an 
open architecture solution, persisted; SCE delayed deployment choosing instead to develop an open and 
interoperable solution. SCE filed its final application in July 2007 and is awaiting approval for $1.72 
billion. Even since the 2005 analysis, PG&E’s deployment plans have been updated to allow for a more 
advanced system with remote connection/disconnection, remote upgradability and an interface with 
the HAN; approval for this upgrade (and a further $623 million) is pending (Roberts, 2008). The CPUC 
has directed PG&E to continue to monitor the evolution of the technology and to consider further 
upgrades to its programme in due course. 
6.2 International analysis: Smart metering costs 
In this and the following section we will build on the discussion of costs and benefits from Section 4 to 
investigate the differences across international studies. In table 21, we have selected a number of cost 
benefit analyses to compare according to the shares of three main cost categories as a percentage of 
                                                          
14
 Costs that accrue to parties other than the company responsible for implementing and operating the metering 
system, e.g. government or regulatory administration/management costs  
15
 Benefits that accrue to parties other than the company responsible for implementing and operating the 
metering system and the consumer, e.g. wider social benefits of reducing energy consumption, network benefits if 
the financial benefits do not already take these into account.  
 45 
the present value of total costs.  Some of the analyses surveyed for this paper could not be included due 
to the lack of details on the breakdown of costs.  There are, however, interesting results from other 
studies that will be discussed in a more qualitative manner later in the section. 
Some of the studies (both GB and Victoria) assess in detail the effects of adjusting the parameters in the 
analysis, for example the technology of the meter, the type of roll-out, or the communications system.  
Where multiple scenarios are conducted, the description and the results of the alternative scenario are 
in parentheses. Comparing the annual per meter costs across studies requires some caution: the studies 
are not directly comparable because of a range of differing assumptions, including discount rates and 
the length of time used to compute present value cost streams. Furthermore, where both electricity and 
gas meters are installed, per meter costs differ by utility. 
  
 46 
Table 21: Meter, meter installation and communications costs as a percentage of total cost 
Assumptions Total 
incremental 
cost (PV) 
Meters Meter 
Installation 
Communications 
system (capital, 
installation & 
management) 
Great Britain 
(Ofgem 2006a) 
-electricity only 
-AMM: core plus display 
-(AMR) 
-instantaneous roll-out 
-Business case: 20-year 
evaluation; 10% cost of 
capital 
-28 million meters 
£7515m - 
£13.42 per 
electricity meter 
p.a. 
(£4110m - £7.34 
per electricity 
meter p.a.) 
 
58% 
(44%) 
12% (16%) 18% (16%) 
Great Britain 
(Frontier 2007a) 
-gas & electricity 
-AMM: core plus display, 
remote connection/switching, 
import/export metering  
-Current industry structure 
-Replacement schedule 
-(2: 10-year roll-out) 
-(3: 7-year roll-out) 
-Social CBA: 3.5% 
discount rate; 
additional cost of 
capital at 10%  
-20-year evaluation 
-GSM  
-28 million electricity 
meters; 22 million gas 
meters 
£4663m - £4.66 
per meter p.a.* 
(2: £6738m - 
£6.724 per meter 
p.a.) 
(3: £6109m - 
£6.10 per meter 
p.a.) 
 
47%  
(2: 41%) 
(3: 44%) 
1%  
(2: 3%) 
(3: 1%) 
30%  
(2: 33%) 
(3: 24%) 
Netherlands 
(SenterNovem, 2005) 
-gas & electricity 
-AMM: core plus remote 
connection and load limiting  
-10-year roll-out 
-Social CBA: 30-year 
evaluation; 7% 
negotiable interest 
- 40% PLC; 40% 
internet; 20% GSM 
-6.7 million households 
€2003 - €10 per 
household p.a.* 
 
40% 38% 
Victoria, Australia 
(CRA, 2005) 
-electricity only 
-AMM: core plus remote 
connection 
 
-4-year roll-out 
-6.5% discount rate 
-18-year evaluation 
-PLC (mesh radio) 
-2.4 million meters 
*relative to roll-out of 
interval meters w/o 
communications 
$371m - $8.60 
per electricity 
meter p.a. 
($406m – $9.40 
per electricity 
meter p.a.) 
 
59% 
(53%) 
19% (18%) 20% (26%) 
California, US 
(PG&E 2005) 
-gas & electricity 
-AMM: core 
-5-year roll-out 
-evaluation: 17 years at 
7.4% discount rate 
-PLC for electric meters 
-5.1 million electric 
-4.2 million gas 
$2258m - $14.28 
per meter p.a.* 
 
36% 16% 21% 
*These per meter per annum figures are averaged over the total number of gas and electricity meters 
although meter costs and installation vary by type of meter 
 
 47 
Meters The most significant share of total project costs across studies is the purchase of new 
meters. From Ofgem’s 2006 study, we see that decreasing the level of functionality of the meter (from 
an AMM to an AMR-capable meter) decreases this share from 58 to 44%, i.e. almost a 25% reduction; 
there will, however, be a parallel reduction in the benefits derived from the smart meter. The lowest 
percentage share for meter costs is 36% in PG&E’s analysis. Costs for this analysis are based on 
retrofitting just over half of the electricity meters and 96% of the gas meters; PG&E has since altered its 
initial strategy because of the restricted functionality of its original system proposal. The Dutch study 
has the lowest cost per meter per annum; however this is based on a 30-year period of evaluation (the 
longest of all studies in the table) and meter functionality is not as advanced as the Frontier study. 
Meter installation The Frontier study of GB illustrates the effect of both deployment speed and 
industry structure on installation costs. When meters are deployed on a replacement basis, installation 
costs are just 1% of total costs; when the speed increases to a 10-year schedule, costs rise to 3%.  
Installation costs in the Ofgem analysis, where roll-out is assumed to be instantaneous, are 12% of total 
costs; and in Victoria they are almost a fifth of total costs based on a 4-year roll-out. 
Industry structure has an impact on installation costs in the Frontier study for two reasons: First, when 
the roll-out is coordinated on a geographic basis with one party responsible for metering services 
(scenario 3), travel time between installation sites can be minimised; and second a coordinated 
geographic roll-out facilitates the simultaneous installation of gas and electricity meters. PG&E in 
California benefits from both of these factors because it supplies both gas and electricity in a defined 
region. 
Communications system Uncertainty is a unifying characteristic in international analyses of the 
costs of communications systems.  The Victorian study is one of the most detailed in looking at 
differences in communications costs.  The first scenario assesses the costs and benefits of using existing 
Power Line Carrier (PLC) technology; the communications system amounts to 20% of total costs.  In the 
second scenario, mesh radio is used and the share of total costs is slightly higher at 26%. 
The Frontier analysis focuses exclusively on GSM due to the lack of available information on other 
systems.  Ofgem does not choose a particular communications solution to assess, citing limited 
information and wide cost ranges as the main barriers.  Of the studies in Table 21, Ofgem’s analysis has 
the lowest share for communications; there are, however, factors other than uncertainty at work. The 
main scenario in the Dutch analysis includes 3 different communications solutions that are 
simultaneously adopted; and the share of communications costs is more than double the Ofgem share.  
This may offer a more realistic basis to study communications costs as it does not assume one solution 
for all customers. When the effects of moving to PLC (Power Line Carrier)-only and internet-only 
solutions are explored, however, the size of the net benefit in the same study increases by 25% (from 
€1.2 to 1.5 billion) and 33% (from €1.2 to 1.6 billion) respectively.  A GSM-only solution by contrast 
reduces the net benefit by 100% (from €1.2 billion to 0) as full nationwide coverage is lacking. 
 48 
Changes in overall benefit/cost ratios depend on country and regional geographic context, particularly in 
relation to customer density.  In lower density areas, PLC tends to be a cost-effective solution but slower 
relative data communication rates may be a barrier to widespread implementation (CRA, 2005).  
Widespread internet-based solutions may offer additional positive externalities in terms of increasing 
the level of internet access penetration as a by-product of deploying smart metering.  In Germany, a 
number of suppliers are investigating the potential for internet-based solutions, for example Yello in 
partnership with Microsoft. 
Further evidence on costs from France and Great Britain In the French smart metering study 
(Capgemini, 2007), the costs are not broken down according to the same level of detail as the studies in 
Table 21.  Nevertheless, there are a number of lessons in terms of the effects of technology differences 
and deployment speeds on costs. Three technology scenarios are considered in the study; their main 
features are outlined in Table 22.   
Table 22: Technology scenarios from the French cost benefit analysis 
 Reading Other 
 
Scenario 
A 
-Once monthly and on demand  
Scenario 
B 
-Half-hourly data  
-Once monthly and on demand 
 
-Prepayment option through 
computer or call centre 
-External display optional 
-Data available to customer in week 
following reading 
Scenario 
C 
-5- or 10-minute interval data 
-Reading once a week and once a day if 
service depends on it 
-Interfaces for gas and water meters 
-Data available electronically to 
customer the day after reading 
Source: Capgemini, 2007 
All three scenarios have different levels of AMM and are differentiated by the resolution of the data 
retrieved from the meters, frequency of meter readings and the facility for communication with other 
meters and devices.  The scenarios have the following functions in common: remote 
connection/disconnection; change of tariffs; power limitation; and the facility for the meter to 
communicate with appliances (heating, washing machine, etc.). 
Between the three scenarios, differences in overall costs are as follows: a 7% increase from scenario A to 
B; and an 8% increase from scenario B to C.  These cost differences are described as weak in the report 
and are contrasted with the cost differences that occur when deployment speeds are varied.  Deploying 
the project in 10 years rather than 5 years reduces overall costs by approximately 14% (across 
scenarios).  This reduction is due to the cost advantages for distribution companies from lower 
installation and lower stranded costs. 
 49 
The Carbon Trust 2007 study investigates the costs and benefits of smart metering for SMEs in GB; it 
gives some useful insights into the potential for future cost reductions. Table 23 gives an overview of 
meter and related service costs under both current and future cost scenarios. The study concludes that 
under current costs, there is a net benefit only for high volume SME customers; under the future cost 
scenario, there is a net benefit for both electricity and gas smart metering for all SME users. 
Table 23: Current versus future smart metering costs for SMEs 
Component Costing scenario 
Meter costs Current (£) Future (£) 
Site survey 218 44 
Meter (inc. installation) 343 120 
Total 561 164 
Service costs Current single/multi sites (£/year) Future (£/year) 
Data only 242/120 20 
Data and advice 522/176 70 
Personal contact 936/507 N/A 
Source: Carbon Trust (2007) 
Comparisons can be drawn between the lower end of the SME market and the household market for 
smart metering; the main common characteristic being that both markets have a large number of single 
sites.  These are more costly for energy suppliers to serve and with insufficient financial incentives for 
suppliers, the market is likely to develop slowly, in a very fragmented way and with limited economies of 
scale (Carbon Trust, 2007). 
Economies of scale and service innovations are the main factors that drive the future capital and service 
cost reductions studied by the Carbon Trust. Service innovations are driven by increasing competition 
and the entry of larger players to the market. The Carbon Trust estimates that the cost reductions in 
Table 23 could be realistically achieved by 2012 if there are clear market signals and a defined time 
frame (Carbon Trust, 2007). Innovation in smart home services and smart appliances could increase the 
potential for demand response; quantifying these benefits before the technology options are fully 
developed, however, is inherently difficult (BERR, 2008b). 
International roll-out experience confirms that cost reductions can be achieved over time.  In the case of 
Vattenfall’s experience in Sweden, for example, hardware costs have decreased even as functionality 
has improved (Nordgren, 2008). Experience in California has shown that there may be an option value 
associated with waiting to invest if investing now will result in the deployment of and even lock-in to an 
inferior technology. If the metering system is open rather than proprietary, however, future 
 50 
development within the same system is possible. Interoperability has been driving innovation in recent 
years and has characterised the divergence in paths between PG&E and SCE in California. Likewise, 
Vattenfall’s strategy has been to ensure that a common meter data management system is in place 
across a variety of technology types. They have also adopted a phased implementation strategy in order 
to allow for flexibility in technology choice, thus overcoming the risk of lock-in to an inferior technology. 
Stranded assets The costs of potential stranding have been included explicitly in a number of 
business case analyses of smart metering. Table 24 compares stranded costs per meter per annum and 
as a percentage of total costs for Ofgem’s 2006 study of Great Britain and Capgemini’s study of France. 
Table 24: Stranded costs of metering 
 STRANDING PER 
METER P.A. 
% OF COSTS 
Ofgem, 2006 
-instantaneous roll-out 
-20-year analysis 
-10% cost of capital 
£1.76 electricity  12% of supplier costs (AMM 
credit) 
£1.95 gas  13% of supplier costs (AMM 
credit) 
Capgemini, 2007 
-5.25% real discount rate 
-33.4 million electricity and gas 
meters 
€0.91**  (5-year roll-out 
based on €586m total 
costs over 20 years) 
Basic AMM*: 11%  
Advanced AMM: 9%  
(of DNO’s costs) 
€0.44 (10-year roll-out 
based on €355m total 
costs over 25 years) 
Basic AMM: 8% 
Advanced AMM*: 7% 
(of DNO’s costs) 
 
Notes: *Basic AMM refers to Scenario 1 of the study, i.e. AMM with core functions and display; Advanced refers to 
Scenario 3, i.e. AMM with advanced functions. For more details see Table 11. ** £1 = €1.46 at annual average spot 
exchange rate for 2007 (Bank of England Statistics). 
 
A longer roll-out lowers stranded costs per meter and as a percentage of total costs. In addition, when 
the metering system is more advanced, stranded costs constitute a smaller share of overall metering 
costs. 
6.3 International analysis: Operational benefits of smart metering 
Comparing benefits across international studies is not as straightforward as comparing the costs, mainly 
due to differences in approaches to their classification and in some cases a lack of quantified benefits.  
In this section, we compare operational benefits across a number of studies. First we look at the benefits 
to suppliers and networks; and then we discuss the economic and customer benefits of improved 
operational efficiency and service quality. 
 51 
6.3.1 Suppliers and network operational benefits 
Meter reading Reducing the costs of meter reading tends to be the largest operational benefit of 
smart metering; it is consequently a major driver in considering a smart meter roll-out.  In Table 25, the 
reduction in meter reading costs as a percentage of total benefits to the supplier and the network (and 
metering companies in the case of the Netherlands) are shown for a number of international studies.  
Some of the studies (Ofgem, Victoria) subdivide the benefits into savings from regular manual readings 
and savings from special reads, e.g. final meter readings when a customer moves house.  In order to 
compare across studies, meter reading costs in the table include both categories. Assumptions are the 
same as those presented in Table 21; alternative scenarios are in parentheses. 
Table 25: Reduction in meter reading costs as a % of total supplier/network benefits 
Study Supplier/network 
benefits (PV) 
Reduction in meter 
reading costs 
PG&E, 2005 $2362m - $14.94/meter p.a. 46% 
Frontier, 2007a: 
Scenario 2 
(Scenario 3)  
£3286m – £3.29/meter p.a. 
(£5132m - £5.13/meter p.a.) 
47%  
(39%) 
Ofgem, 2006: 
AMM 
(AMR) 
£6.21/ electricity meter p.a. 
(£2.81/meter p.a.) 
19%  
(42%) 
CRA, 2005 – Victoria: 
PLC scenario 
$433m - $10.02/electricity 
meter p.a. 
 
80% 
Ontario, 2005 $4.69/electricity meter p.a.* 92% 
Netherlands, 2005 €1160m - €5.77/household 
p.a. 
26% 
*This figure does not include demand response benefits as they are not quantified in the study. 
Note: £1 = $2.39 Australian; £1 = $1.82 US; £1 = $2.2 Canadian; £1 = €1.46 at annual average spot exchange rates 
for 2005 (Bank of England Statistics). 
Some of the variation in the table is accounted for by differences in the number of benefit categories 
quantified.  In the case of Ontario for example, where reduced meter reading costs account for 92% of 
supplier/network benefits, no demand response benefits are quantified; in fact, the only other benefit 
 52 
included is the savings from eliminating estimated reads.  Many of the other operational benefits to the 
network are not considered quantitatively, although they are mentioned in the accompanying 
discussion.  The same is true for Victoria where a lack of information from stakeholders is cited as the 
main reason for the narrow range of benefits quantified. 
In the Dutch study, benefits to metering companies and a wider range of quantified benefits are 
included, for example reductions in customer service costs and faster detection of fraud. The same is 
true for the two Frontier scenarios. Ofgem’s analysis also includes a wider range of operational and 
demand response benefits; even compared with the Frontier and the Dutch studies, however, the share 
of reduction in meter reading costs is low. One of the assumptions of the study in particular affects this 
share: that the requirement for a two-yearly physical inspection of meters remains in place. 
This may reduce the overall benefits to suppliers in Great Britain of remote meter reading compared 
with other countries. It is a barrier that has been recognised by Ofgem; and although the requirement 
will remain in place for the time being, suppliers can request a derogation if they can demonstrate that 
customers will be better off and safety not compromised (Ofgem, 2007). When meter technology is 
more advanced (AMM versus AMR), the share of reduced meter reading costs is lower due to the 
increase in the size of other operational and demand response benefits. 
Customer service Improving the accuracy of bills reduces the frequency of customer complaints 
and the costs of re-issuing bills in response to queries.  Reductions in activity at customer service call 
centres have been used in a number of studies to quantify the benefits to the supplier or utility.  Billing 
benefits due to savings in re-issuing bills and the reduced costs of switching customers from credit to 
prepayment metering are the other main categories. Table 26 summarises the shares of lower customer 
service costs for three studies.  Information on the categories included is also listed as the definitions of 
customer service costs vary across studies.  The respective shares of all three studies give an idea of how 
the various components add up and contribute to total supplier/network benefits. 
Table 26: Lower customer service costs as % of total supplier/network benefits 
STUDY LOWER CUSTOMER 
SERVICE COSTS 
CATEGORIES INCLUDED 
PG&E, 2005 2% (11%) Reduced customer contact (plus billing benefits) 
 
Ofgem, 2006a 
(AMM) 
18% (28%) Reduced customer contact and billing benefits; (plus 
lower debt management) 
Frontier, 2007a  
(10-year roll-out) 
44% Call centre savings; billing benefits; lower debt 
management 
 
 53 
In the PG&E study a 2% share is attributed to the direct benefits of reduced customer contact and a 
further 11% to the billing benefits derived from an end to estimated bills.  In the Ofgem analysis, these 
two benefit categories together account for 18% of total supplier and network benefits; lower debt 
management costs, i.e. switching customers from credit to prepayment and vice versa, account for a 
further 10%.  In the Frontier study the same three categories account for 44% of total supplier/network 
benefits. 
Losses and outage detection Other operational benefits include reductions in technical and non-
technical losses and faster detection of and response time to outages.  In Table 27, the main 
assumptions for each of these categories are summarised for a number of recent studies. Reduced 
technical losses may result from having a more complete demand profile for any given node on the 
electricity and gas networks (Frontier Economics, 2007a; Ofgem, 2006a). Although many studies have 
recognised technical loss reduction as a potential network benefit, Ofgem’s analysis is the only one to 
quantify this reduction. SCE in California decided that the amount of losses incurred by the pre-existing 
customer load profile system was not significant enough to warrant further study its potential. 
Table 27: Technical losses, theft and improved response to outages  
Study Technical loss 
reduction  
Theft reduction 
 
Improved response to outages 
 £ per meter per year 
Ofgem, 
2006a 
1% loss reduction: DNO 
benefit per meter £0.08 elec. 
£0.03 gas 
25% reduction: 
£0.61 elec. credit 
£0.27 gas prepay 
10% reduction in CML: 
£0.05 elec. 
BERR, 2008b 
(AMR) 
Recognised as potential 
network benefit; n.q. 
10% reduction: 
£0.20  
Recognised as potential network benefits; 
n.q. 
BERR, 2008b 
(AMM) 
n.q. £0.20 Recognised as potential network benefits; 
n.q. 
SCE, 2005 
and 2007 
n.q.; amount of losses not 
significant enough to warrant 
further investigation 
Societal benefit; n.q. Reduced field visits due to accuracy in 
verifying outages through meters; 2% of 
operational benefits 
CRA, 2008 
(Australia) 
Recognised as potential 
network benefit; n.q. 
Recognised as 
potential network 
benefit; n.q. 
Reduction in minutes off supply of 
between 3% and 7.5% 
Note: n.q.: not quantified 
 54 
Reducing non-technical losses, i.e. from energy theft, have not been quantified in all studies. In the 
Australian national study, CRA’s work on the network benefits of smart metering identifies theft 
reduction as a network benefit but does not quantify it due to a lack of information. SCE on the other 
hand discusses the potential for reduced theft as a societal benefit and does not include it in its financial 
analysis. Society benefits from a reduction in energy theft because it is a cost that is borne by all 
consumers; any reduction will allow SCE to spread its revenue requirement over more energy sales, thus 
reducing rates (SCE, 2007). BERR’s assumption of a 10% reduction considers only the marginal savings 
that will be passed on to society; Ofgem assumes a 25% reduction and considers the benefits to 
suppliers of recouping costs from customers. 
Improved response to outages has been measured in two main ways: Ofgem and CRA use the reduction 
in minutes off supply or customer minutes lost (CML) to estimate its potential impact; SCE estimates the 
reduction in field visits due to improved accuracy in identifying and verifying outages. 
6.3.2 Economic and customer operational benefits 
Increasing the operational efficiency of metering and reducing costs for suppliers, metering companies 
and the networks ultimately leads to savings being passed on to the customer.  Where metering charges 
are regulated as part of the electricity networks, this happens through the actions of the regulator.  
Where metering charges are determined in a competitive market, competition between suppliers 
and/or metering companies improves outcomes for customers. 
In addition to cost savings from operational benefits, there are dynamic benefits for customers and the 
economy as a whole.  Remote reading and remote disconnection/connection of meters may facilitate 
supplier switching and improve the level of competition in energy supply. In the Dutch study, easier 
supplier switching in electricity constitutes 23% of total benefits to households due to the improved 
level of choice and the assumed decrease in the price of electricity (Senternovem, 2005).  BERR’s 2008 
study assumes savings of £100m per year due to a smoother supplier switching process (BERR, 2008b). 
The organisation of the metering market has an impact on the magnitude of dynamic benefits 
particularly in the long-run.  Where metering competition exists, there is a tendency for smart metering 
implementation to occur slowly and in a more fragmented manner.  However, once the barriers to 
competition have been adequately dealt with (for example data standards and access to metering data 
by third parties); the level of choice and innovation in retailer and complementary services encouraged 
by competition in the metering market may lead to more efficient long-run outcomes (Carbon Trust, 
2007).  Competition may allow for a broader range of metering technologies and solutions to develop in 
contrast to a situation in which market actors or policy makers attempt to pick a winner early in the 
technology’s development. 
Smart meters may reduce barriers to microgeneration if the import/export metering function is 
included; this would remove the cost to customers of installing additional metering equipment to link 
the microgeneration units to the grid. BERR’s 2008 study estimates these savings as a few pence per 
meter per annum but considers more work necessary in this area (BERR, 2008b). The national study 
 55 
conducted in Australia concludes that the cost of installing an additional meter relative to the cost of the 
microgeneration unit itself is small; and as a result it is unlikely to act as a major barrier to adoption 
(NERA, 2008). 
Tackling fuel poverty in Great Britain is high on the government’s energy agenda given that fuel prices 
are expected to increase in the future.  Reducing the costs of prepayment technology and giving 
customers the choice to switch between credit and prepayment metering is a benefit that may be 
particularly valuable to those on lower incomes. The benefits from giving all customers more control 
over their consumption and consequently their fuel budgets are difficult to quantify; giving this control 
particularly in the context of fuel poverty is an important social target. It is important that safeguards 
are in place to ensure that new functionality protects customers, e.g. fair terms for switching customers 
from credit to prepayment (Owen and Ward, 2007) and protection against self-disconnection (Owen and 
Ward, 2006). 
6.4 International analysis: Demand response benefits of smart metering 
Demand response benefits are more uncertain than operational benefits; however their analysis has the 
potential to make or break the case for smart metering.  The impacts of peak shifting and reductions in 
overall energy consumption have implications for all market actors and act as drivers for smart metering 
in different ways across countries.  To illustrate this, we present a brief case study of California; we then 
consider how the wider economic and customer benefits of demand response have been analysed. 
California case study: Demand response and the utility business case In California, the initial 
drive for smart metering came from the regulator but the methodology for decision-making has since 
been driven by the business case analyses of the three major utilities.  For both PG&E and SCE in 
California, when the benefits of demand response to the network are not included in the analysis, there 
is an “operational gap”, i.e. a gap between total costs and total operational benefits.  With demand 
response benefits, total benefits outweigh total costs as can be seen from Figure 6. 
PG&E’s operational gap decreased from $1.2 billion (in earlier analyses) to $409 million (in the 2005 
analysis featured in figure 6); this means that a larger proportion of the project costs can now be 
covered by operational benefits to the utility.  This is mainly due to implementation cost reductions. As 
the operational business case improves, “the importance of debating the precise value of key drivers of 
demand response, such as participation rates, elasticities, and the value of capacity has diminished” 
(PG&E, 2005, p. 40). 
 
 
 
 
 
 56 
Figure 5: Operational gaps and demand response: SCE and PG&E, California 
 
Source: SCE (2007), CPUC (2006) 
Demand response benefits from changes in customer demand are driven by automated load control, 
time-varying prices and improved information. Changes in behaviour may result in reductions in overall 
energy consumption and/or shifting of consumption from peak to off-peak times. 
For an integrated utility, the main impacts of these changes are three-fold: 
 System reliability benefits: 
With increased flexibility in dispatching and reducing load from more price-responsive demand, the 
effective capacity margin can be increased and the loss of load probability reduced (PG&E, 2005). 
 Avoided or deferred improvements to transmission and distribution networks: 
Peak load investment in the networks can be avoided or deferred due to shifts in peak consumption. 
 Reduced costs of procuring energy: 
If customers use less electricity and/or shift consumption from a more expensive to a less expensive 
period, the costs of procuring energy for customers is reduced. This saving could be passed through 
to customers in lower charges if accounted for by the regulator (CPUC) as an adjustment in revenue 
requirement. 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Operational Total (including
DR)
Operational Total (including
DR)
$
 (
m
il
li
o
n
s
)
Costs
Benefits
SCE PG&E 
Operational 
gap 
Operational 
gap 
 57 
Identifying the magnitude of these benefits requires: (i) estimating how responsive demand will be to 
different forms of pricing, information and load control; and (ii) calculating the value of the response. 
PG&E and SCE based their analyses on a pricing pilot conducted in California in 2003/2004.  All three 
California utilities took part in the pilot and it is one of the most extensive of its kind conducted 
internationally. 2,500 residential and small business customers were involved; residential customers 
were placed on a time-of-use (TOU) pricing scheme with a two-part tariff (peak and off-peak prices) for 
most of the year.  On up to 15 days during the year, a critical peak could be announced one day in 
advance where peak period prices were on average 3 times the TOU peak price and 6 times the off-peak 
price. 
Sampling was stratified by building type and climate zone; within each stratum potential participants 
were randomly selected and contacted with enrolment packages promising a participation incentive 
payment of $175 over the course of the pilot. About 20% of those contacted accepted the invitation and 
the final sample was representative as a cross-section of California residents by appliance holdings, 
income, education and a selection of other variables (Herter et al., 2006). 
Some residential and small business customers were placed on a slightly different pricing programme 
where advance notification of the critical peak could be as short as four hours. Commercial participants 
were offered a smart thermostat free of charge to automate demand response during critical peak 
periods. The residential participants, 122 in total, were chosen from a large thermostat load-control 
program in SDG&E’s service territory because they already had smart thermostats installed. The 
thermostat would automatically adjust the air conditioning setting when critical peak prices were in 
effect; customers could override the change if they wished (CRA, 2006). 
Among the most important findings for the utilities were: (i) the response of customers in hotter climate 
zones, with higher levels of central air conditioning, was more than double the response in other areas; 
(ii) information only did not result in sustainable demand response during critical peak times; and (iii) 
not all customers (only 30%) accepted an enabling technology (the smart thermostat) even though it 
was offered free of charge (George and Faruqui, 2005). 
In terms of the magnitude of customer price response, a selection of key findings are summarised in 
Table 28. Average prices were about 10 cents/kWh off-peak, 20 cents/kWh at peak times, and 60 
cents/kWh during critical peak hours.  The differences in response according to end-use patterns 
(presence of air-conditioning in particular) and income level would suggest that it may be more effective 
for utilities to target certain segments of their customer base first in order to maximise demand 
response benefits.  Overall in the California pilot, 30% of the customers provided 80% of the demand 
response. 
The average residential response during 2-hour critical peak periods for customers with smart 
thermostats ranged from load reductions of 13% to 41%. All participants in this group were high-use 
(>600kWh per month) single-family homes with air conditioning (Herter et al., 2006). 
 58 
Table 28: Results of the California Pricing Pilot 2003/2004 
CUSTOMER GROUP 
(RESIDENTIAL) 
CRITICAL PEAK 
LOAD REDUCTION 
CONSERVATION EFFECT 
Average 13% No change in total energy use 
observed based on average 
pilot prices Central A/C 17% 
No central A/C 8% 
Average annual income: $100,000 17% 
Average annual income: $40,000 11% 
Average daily use: 200% of average 15% 
Average daily use: 50% of average 12% 
Source: George and Faruqui (2005) 
A reduction of even 5 percent in overall peak demand has been estimated to lead to substantial savings 
in California, as well as at the national level in the US. Faruqui et al. (2007) estimate that the avoided 
capacity cost from a 5 percent reduction, i.e. the reduction in peaking capacity, is $2.4 billion per year at 
the national level. There are also likely to be additional savings from reduced reliance on transmission 
and distribution capacity. Providing the types of dynamic pricing that are best suited to engender this 
demand response requires the installation of advanced metering systems. 
Demand response: economic and customer benefits The economic and customer impacts of 
demand response facilitated by smart metering are typically more difficult to quantify. Analyses in Great 
Britain and particularly Australia have been the most detailed in their treatment of the potential 
economic impacts of both energy conservation and peak shifting.  In Great Britain, the demand response 
benefits are valued in particular for their potential contribution to carbon emissions reductions, overall 
energy efficiency and tackling fuel poverty.  Frontier Economics (2007a) calculates the value of demand 
response benefits for Great Britain according to three main categories: (i) energy savings; (ii) carbon 
savings; and (iii) avoided peak network capacity. 
All three categories are affected by both lower levels of demand and shifts in demand from peak to off-
peak hours.  The benefits to the network were discussed in the previous section; energy and carbon 
savings from the Frontier study are summarised in Table 18.  Energy savings from both lower demand 
and load shifting account for the largest share of demand response benefits across the three scenarios; 
total demand response benefits including network benefits from avoided capacity account for between 
47 and 56% of overall benefits. 
 59 
These results assume a reduction in consumption of 2% for domestic gas and electricity credit 
customers, 1% for domestic gas and electricity prepayment customers and 0.25% for small business gas 
and electricity customers. The study also assumes that 20% of domestic customers will opt for a time-of-
use tariff. In Great Britain, the extent of benefits from reductions in average consumption is important in 
determining whether smart meters should be mandated or not. If domestic credit customers’ average 
reduction drops to 1%, only the regional franchise model scenario shows a net benefit (Frontier, 2007a). 
Lower demand and load shifting have opposite effects on carbon savings in Table 29.  Load shifting has a 
slightly negative impact due to the generation merit order assumptions made in the study.   
Table 29: Frontier study of Great Britain: Green benefits of smart metering 
 REPLACEMENT BASIS 
ROLL-OUT; 
SUPPLIER-LED 
10-YEAR ROLL-
OUT; SUPPLIER-
LED 
7-YEAR ROLL-OUT; 
REGIONAL FRANCHISE 
MODEL 
Energy savings 1,549 2,349 2,634 
Lower demand 1,533 2,324 2,607 
Load shifting 16 24 27 
Carbon savings 614 924 1,028 
Lower demand 618 930 1,035 
Load shifting -4 -7 -7 
Total DR benefits 2,636 3,999 4,477 
Total benefits 4,717 7,285 9,609 
Incremental costs (4,663)  
 
(6,738)  (6,109) 
Net benefit 54 546 3,499 
CBA ratio 1:1 1:1.1 1:1.6 
Source: Frontier (2007a) 
In Great Britain, coal tends to be the marginal plant more often during off-peak periods and gas during 
peak periods.  Significant shifts of consumption from peak to off-peak periods will therefore lead to an 
increase in average emissions for a given level of total consumption. The same is true for most 
Australian jurisdictions where a significant proportion of peak plants are gas and hydro (CRA, 2007).  
Shifting consumption from peak to off-peak periods, however, has additional economic benefits in terms 
of deferring the need for investment in peak plants.  Depending on the size of the shift, this may 
significantly alter generation investment decisions. 
 60 
Customer benefits from demand response tend to be sensitive to variation due to their reliance on 
behavioural change.  The Netherlands analysis calculates that household benefits range from 
approximately €1.5 billion to €7.5 billion (Senternovem, 2005).  By contrast, however, a detailed study 
recently conducted at a national level in Australia has estimated the demand response impacts on 
consumers according to various levels of meter and system functionality.  The methodology used 
considers the changes in consumer surplus and the redistribution of surplus from suppliers, network 
operators and generators to consumers.  The net societal benefit from changes in consumption is also 
estimated.  Each function that allows for greater demand response in the analysis (daily remote reading, 
in-house displays and direct load control) results in a net increase in consumer surplus (NERA, 2007a). 
Further innovation in enabling technologies for demand response can be promoted by smart metering, 
for example interfaces with appliances in the home via automated monitoring and control.16 This type of 
innovation may reduce the uncertainty surrounding estimates of demand response and has the 
potential to increase the size of demand response benefits in the future. 
6.5 Minimum functionality requirements 
Choosing the level of functionality of smart metering systems is a central question in international 
studies and is closely connected to the analysis of costs and benefits.  As is the case with the preceding 
studies, international approaches to regulating the functionality of smart metering systems, once the 
decision has been made to proceed with deployment, have differed.  To illustrate this, Table 30 
contrasts two approaches to establishing minimum functionality for smart metering. 
As can be seen from the table, the Italian approach has been to specify the functions that are required 
of the meter and communications system.  AEEG, the Italian regulator, published these minimum 
requirements at the end of 2006 after significant installations of smart electricity meters had already 
been undertaken by Enel.  The decision by Enel to deploy smart metering was an independent decision 
based on its own business case.  Acea Roma and Asmea Brescia followed suit shortly afterwards with 
their own smart metering programmes.  It is now mandatory for other distribution companies to 
implement smart metering from 2008.  
The Californian regulatory approach has been quite different from the Italian approach for a number of 
reasons.  As we discussed previously the CPUC initiated the drive for more advanced metering in the 
region and called on the utilities to submit their business case analyses for approval.  Avoiding another 
electricity crisis by activating a more responsive demand and controlling the peaks were of paramount 
importance from the CPUC’s perspective.  This focus on the overarching aims rather than the specific 
                                                          
16
 For an interesting discussion of how this type of demand-side management can be applied using internet-
enabled monitoring and control to make more efficient use of refrigeration, air conditioning, space heating and 
lighting , see Hong et al., 2008.  
 61 
means is reflected in the minimum functionality requirements.  The aims rather than the details of the 
functions are specified, allowing for greater flexibility of implementation. 
 
Table 30: Minimum functionality requirements for smart metering systems in Italy and California 
 ITALY 
 
CALIFORNIA 
Pricing (1) Four price bands  
(2) 5 intervals (time-bands) to apply price 
bands to 
Implementation of price-responsive tariffs 
for all consumers 
 
Meter and meter 
display 
(1) Active energy withdrawn in hourly load 
profiles 
(2) Total accumulated consumption & 4 
separate consumption registers (in up to 5 
time-bands) 
(3) Daily programming Monday to Saturday; 
Separate programme for Sunday and 
holidays 
(4) Minimum storage for data: 36 days 
(5) Meter to display consumption per 
register; current price band; date and time; 
instantaneous power consumption; 
messages 
(1) Interval data that allows for greater 
customer understanding of hourly usage 
patterns and how these relate to energy 
costs  
(2) Flexible customer access to energy usage 
data 
 
 
Communications (1) Guaranteed security of data withdrawal 
from meters and data concentrators 
(2) Remote transmission of messages to 
meter display 
(3) Transmission of status word to AMM 
control centre reporting 
hardware/functional abnormalities 
 
 
 
(1) Compatible w/ applications that provide 
customer education; customised billing; 
energy management info; improved 
complaint resolution 
(2) Compatible w/ utility applications that 
promote and enhance system operating 
efficiency and service reliability  
(3) Capable of interfacing w/ load control 
communication technology 
 
Source: AEEG (2006a), AEEG (2006b), CPUC (2004). 
There is also a strong focus in the California specifications for the communications system to be 
compatible with a range of applications and other technologies.  This question of interoperability is 
 62 
perhaps even more crucial to the market in Great Britain where there is competition in metering 
activities.  Interoperability in this sense refers to supporting both communication between the system, 
market actors and other platforms in the home area network, as well as supporting innovation within 
metering and other related technologies.  It also requires a framework that uses open standards where 
possible, thereby avoiding proprietary communications systems (ERA, 2008b).  The Energy Retail 
Association in the UK has engaged, and continues to engage, with a range of stakeholders to discuss 
these issues and build consensus on the requirements for such a system in Great Britain. 
7 Conclusions  
Assessing the case for smart metering is a complex process.  Regardless of the country or regional 
context, there is a need for systematic analysis of impacts across the supply chain.  The impacts of 
investing in smart metering can be traced from retail through to distribution, transmission, the 
wholesale electricity market, and ultimately to the consumer. The main costs can be divided into three 
categories: (i) meters; (ii) meter installation; and (iii) the communications and data systems (including 
capital, installation and management).  Stranded costs may also be an important cost component when 
considering the business case for investment. Benefits for market actors and the market as a whole are 
derived from both operational improvements and the facilitation of demand response. 
Some of the most important questions in considering the case for smart metering are as follows.  First of 
all, is there a business case for investing in smart metering for all consumers?  Many countries already 
employ some form of advanced metering for industrial customers but the policy question here relates 
more specifically to smaller users, i.e. SMEs and households.  In a number of international studies, the 
costs of implementing smart metering in these sectors still outweigh the benefits when looking at the 
business case from either a supplier or network operator perspective (Carbon Trust, 2007; Ofgem, 
2006a; Capgemini, 2007; SenterNovem, 2005).  Where operational and demand response benefits are 
more integrated, the business case has tended to be positive as in the case of the California utilities; this 
requires separating financing from the customer via regulated charges. 
In Great Britain and Australia, alternative market models have been quantitatively explored in order to 
assess how changing responsibilities affects total costs and the cost/benefit ratio, as well as the 
allocation of costs and benefits across market actors. Findings suggest that there may be significant cost 
savings from a more coordinated regional rollout strategy. A return to a distributor-led metering system 
in Great Britain, however, is not the only way of achieving this; the regional franchise model could be a 
viable alternative. Competition in the tender process has the potential to drive innovation and the 
delivery of the least cost solution. 
The second question is whether the benefits of smart metering outweigh the costs from a societal 
perspective.  This is particularly important where the business case for investment is not positive.  
Furthermore, investigating the impacts of smart metering investment on all market actors, consumers 
and the electricity market and comparing the respective net benefits or costs helps to reveal who stands 
 63 
to gain or lose the most.  If the case for investing in smart metering is positive for society as a whole but 
is unlikely to be positive from a business perspective, we are left with a key question: Is there a role for 
government and/or the regulator to tackle any remaining barriers or uncertainties? 
Where it has been found that from a societal perspective the case for smart metering is positive and the 
business case negative, approaches have differed internationally.  In the Netherlands, the government 
intervened in the metering market to promote large-scale implementation; in France the regulator is 
expected to publish minimum requirements for smart metering to overcome some of the market 
uncertainty; in Great Britain the regulator has been working to resolve uncertainty regarding data 
access, data formats and minimum standards and by undertaking a large-scale energy demand pilot; and 
in Norway the government is considering setting a deadline for installation of smart meters as was the 
approach previously adopted in Sweden.  All of these approaches aim to deal with one or more aspects 
of uncertainty in the market, policy and customer behaviour. 
The third set of questions relates more specifically to smart metering technology:  how advanced should 
the technology be and how do different technology scenarios have an impact on costs and benefits? We 
have seen that very few studies to date have analysed the incremental costs and benefits on a function-
by-function basis.  The national Australian study is an exception and provides a useful benchmark in 
developing a more detailed discussion. Choosing technologies or regulating how they are chosen is a 
significant challenge given the speed with which improvements and cost reductions have taken place in 
recent years.  The challenge involves setting standards while continuing to encourage innovation and 
cost reductions.  An interoperable framework, such as that developed by SCE in California, allows for a 
variety of solutions to emerge and develop and reduces the option value of waiting for a superior future 
alternative. 
Related to this is the question of technology deployment: how do different roll-out schedules have an 
impact on costs and benefits?  The consequences of changing deployment strategies have been 
explored in a number of studies, for example the study of Great Britain conducted by Frontier 
Economics (2007) and the French study by Capgemini (2007).  In general, deploying smart metering 
systems over a shorter period of time increases the costs associated with installation and stranded 
costs.  However, installing the system over a shorter period of time allows for greater overall savings, 
both operationally and in terms of demand response.  Coordinating the installation of gas and electricity 
smart metering has the potential to decrease installation and communication costs while increasing 
total operational and demand response benefits. 
There is widespread consensus that improving the participation of the demand-side should be a central 
goal for policy in liberalised electricity markets.  The main barriers to greater participation are 
inelasticity of demand and information asymmetry.  More innovative forms of metering provide 
platforms for these barriers to be overcome.  However, there are a number of challenges that first need 
to be addressed in order for smart metering to contribute to this goal. Assessing costs and benefits in a 
systematic way is the first step in identifying barriers, e.g. split incentives, and in comparing results with 
 64 
other countries and regions.  Assessing how costs and benefits change according to different 
deployment or ownership scenarios is also crucial before the government or regulator intervenes to 
change metering market structure or to mandate specific roll-out schedules.  Incorporating analysis of 
future costs and categorising costs by functionality would strengthen analysis and create a sound basis 
for which to develop minimum functionality criteria for smart metering systems. 
Once these challenges are adequately addressed, smart metering has the potential to contribute in a 
cost-effective way to a number of policy goals including improving security of supply, facilitating the 
integration of renewables to the grid, avoiding peaks in fossil generation and tackling fuel poverty.  
Smart metering, however, should not be seen as a goal in itself but rather as a tool in promoting more 
active demand and innovation in equipment for demand-side management.  A policy and regulatory 
framework that encourages innovation, cost reductions and above all interoperability will ensure that 
smart metering is a tool that can evolve in response to the needs of customers, networks, suppliers and 
the electricity market as a whole. 
 
   
 65 
8 REFERENCES 
 
AEEG (2006a). Obligations for the installation of electronic meters for low voltage withdrawal points. 
Annex A to Regulatory Order 18 December 2006 no. 292/06. Autorità per l’energia elettrica e il gas, 
Milan. 
 
AEEG (2006b). Recommendations for the use of electronic meters and AMM systems with low voltage 
customers. Consultation document n. 23/06, 26 July 2006. Autorità per l’energia elettrica e il gas, Milan. 
Available in English from http://www.autorita.energia.it/docs/dc/06/dc_060726_23eng.pdf  
 
Atkinson, S. (1981). Reshaping residential electricity load curves through time-of-use pricing. Resources 
and Energy 3 (1981), 175-194. North Holland Publishing Company. 
 
Ballard, J., Bandera, D., Hunger, D., Lafferty, R., Mahrenholz, G. and Mead, D. (2001). Demand 
responsiveness in electricity markets. Office of Markets, Tariffs and Rates. Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission. 
 
BERR (2007). Energy billing and metering: changing consumer behaviour. Consultation on policies 
presented in the Energy White Paper. August 2007. London: Department for Business, Enterprise and 
Regulatory Reform. 
 
BERR (2008a). Energy billing and metering: changing consumer behaviour. Government response to a 
consultation. April 2008. London: Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform. 
 
BERR (2008b). Impact assessment of smart metering roll out for domestic consumers and for small 
businesses. April 2008. London: Department for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform. 
 
Bhatia, Bhavna and Gulati, Mohinder (2004). Reforming the power sector: controlling electricity theft 
and improving revenue. Public Policy for the private sector. Note Number 272. The World Bank Group, 
Private sector development vice presidency, September 2004. 
 
Bilton, M., Ramsay, C., Leach, M., Devine-Wright, H., Devine-Wright, P., and Kirschen, D. (2008). 
Domestic electricity consumption and demand-side participation: opportunities and challenges for the 
UK power system, pp. 207-228 in Grubb, M., Jamasb, T., and Pollitt, M. (eds.). Delivering a Low Carbon 
Electricity System: Technologies, Economics and Policy. Cambridge University  Press, Cambridge. 
 
Borenstein, S., Jaske, M., and Rosenfeld, A. (2002). Dynamic pricing, advanced metering and demand 
response in electricity markets. Center for the Study of Energy Markets. University of California Energy 
Institute. 
 
 66 
Capgemini (2007). Comparatif international des systèmes de télé-relève ou de télégestion et étude 
technico- économique visant à évaluer les conditions d’une migration du parc actuel de compteurs. 8 
March 2007. Capgemini Consulting. 
 
Carbon Trust (2008). Automatic monitoring and targeting equipment: A guide to equipment eligible for 
Enhanced Capital Allowances. August 2008. Carbon Trust. London. 
 
Carbon Trust (2007). Advanced metering for SMEs: Carbon and cost savings. May 2007. Carbon Trust. 
London. 
 
CER (2007). Smart metering: the next step in implementation. November 2007. Commission for Energy 
Regulation. CER/07/198. Dublin. 
 
CER (2008). Commission Newsletter April-May 2008.  Commission for Energy Regulation, Dublin. 
 
CPUC (2004). Order instituting rulemaking on policies and practices for advanced metering, demand 
response, and dynamic pricing. Before the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
Rulemaking 02-06-001, February 19, 2004. 
 
CPUC (2006). Final opinion authorizing Pacific Gas and Electric Company to deploy advanced metering 
infrastructure. Before the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. Decision 06-07-027, July 
20, 2006. 
 
CRA (2007). Economic impacts of smart metering and direct load control (Stream 5 – Phase I). Prepared 
for Department of Industry, Tourism and Resources. September 2007. Melbourne, Victoria: CRA 
International. 
 
CRA (2006). California’s statewide pricing pilot: Commercial and industrial analysis update. California: 
CRA International. 28 June 2006. 
 
CRA (2005). Advanced Interval Meter Communications Study. Prepared for Department of Infrastructure 
– Energy and Security Division, 23 December 2005. Melbourne, Victoria: CRA International. 
 
Darby, S. (2006). The effectiveness of feedback on energy consumption: A review for Defra of the 
literature on metering, billing and direct displays. Environmental Change Institute, University of Oxford. 
April 2006. 
 
Devine-Wright, H. and Devine-Wright, P. (2006). Prospects for smart metering in the UK, pp. 403-417 in 
Jamasb, T., Nuttall, W., Pollitt, M. (eds.), Future Electricity Technologies and Systems, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
 
 67 
DPI (2007). Advanced Metering Infrastructure Technology Trials Report. Department of Primary 
Industries. Victoria, Australia. November 2007. 
 
DTI (2006). Energy Billing and Metering: changing customer behaviour. An Energy Review consultation. 
Department of Trade and Industry. London. 
 
DTI (2007). Meeting the Energy Challenge: A White Paper on Energy. Department of Trade and Industry. 
London. Available from http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file39387.pdf 
 
DUKES (2006). Digest of UK Energy Statistics. Department for Business Enterprise and Regulatory 
Reform. London. Available from 
http://www.berr.gov.uk/energy/statistics/publications/dukes/2006/page29812.html  
 
Dulleck, Uwe and Kaufmann, Sylvia (2004). Do customer information programs reduce household 
electricity demand – the Irish program. Energy Policy 32 (2004): 1025-1032. 
 
Econ (2007). Nye Måleteknologier. Rapport 2007-047. Report prepared for the Norwegian Energy 
Directorate. May 2007, Oslo. 
 
ERA (2008a). SRSM and beyond: local communications development. Draft by Simon Harrison. 15 April 
2008. SRSM LCD. 
 
ERA (2008b). ERA view on smart metering and interoperability. Slides by Jason Brogden for IET seminar 
on smart metering – Gizmo or revolutionary technology. London, 12 February 2008. 
 
ERGEG (2007). Smart metering with a focus on electricity regulation. European Regulators' Group for 
Electricity and Gas. Ref: E07-RMF-04-03. 31 October 2007. Brussels. 
 
European Union (2006). Directive 2006/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 
2006 on energy end-use efficiency and energy services and repealing Council Directive 93/76/EEC. Official 
Journal of the European Union. 
 
Faruqui, A., Hledik, R., Newell, S. and Pfeifenberger, H. The Power of 5 Percent. The Electricity Journal. 
Vol. 20, Issue 8, 68-77, October 2007.  
 
FERC (2006). Assessment of Demand Response and Advanced Metering. Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission. Staff Report AD-06-2-000. August 2006: Washington DC. 
 
Filippini, Massimo (1995). Electricity demand by time of us: an application of the household AIDS model. 
Energy Economics, Vol. 17, no.3, 197-204. 
 
 68 
Frontier Economics (2007). Smart metering: A report prepared for Centrica. Frontier Economics, London. 
October 2007. 
 
Gallant, Ronald A., and Koenker, Roger W. (1984). Costs and benefits of peak-load pricing of electricity: a 
continuous-time econometric approach. Journal of Econometrics, Volume 26, Issues 1-2, September-
October 1984, 83-113. 
 
George, Stephen S. and Faruqui, Ahmad (2005). California’s Statewide Pricing Pilot: Overview of key 
findings. Charles River Associates. Slides from MADRI Advanced Metering Infrastructure Workshop. May 
4, 2005. 
 
Ghajar, Raymond F. and Khalife, Joseph (2003). Cost/benefit analysis of an AMR system to reduce 
electricity theft and maximize revenues for Électricité du Liban. Applied Energy 76 (2003) 25-37. 
 
Herter, Karen (2007). Residential implementation of critical-peak pricing of electricity. Energy Policy 35 
(2007): 2121-2130. 
 
Hong, Jun, Clarke, Joe, Johnstone, Cameron, and Kim, Jae-min (2008). The application of demand-side 
management via internet-enabled monitoring and control. World Renewable Energy Congress X. 
Glasgow: 21-24 July 2008.  
 
IT Web (2008). Grinpal kick-starts pilot project in India. Press Release issued by Meropa 
Communications. 25 February 2008. Available from:  
http://www.itweb.co.za/sections/industrysolutions/2008/0802250811.asp?A=REP&S=IndustrySolutions
&T=Editorial&O=L  
 
Katz, Michael L. and Shapiro, Carl (1986). Technology adoption in the presence of network externalities. 
Journal of Political Economy. 1986, vol. 94, no. 41: 822-841. 
 
Keirstad, James (2007). Behavioural responses to photovoltaic systems in the UK domestic sector. 
Energy Policy 35 (2007): 4128-4141. 
 
KPMG (2007). Cost benefit analysis of smart metering and direct load control - Workstream 3: Retailer 
Impacts Phase 1 Report. Report for the Ministerial Council on Energy Smart Meter Working Group. 
KPMG: September 2007. 
 
Littlechild, S. (2003). Reflections on incentive regulation. Review of Network Economics  2 (4): 289-315 
 
Metering.com (2008). Smart meter deployment for Finnish utility.  May 6, 2008. Available from 
http://www.metering.com/node/12385 
 
 69 
NERA (2007a). Cost benefit analysis of smart metering and direct load control. Work stream 4: Consumer 
impacts. Report for the Ministerial Council on Energy Smart Meter Working Group. NERA Economic 
Consulting: September 2007. 
 
NERA (2007b). Cost benefit analysis of smart metering and direct load control: Phase I Overview Report. 
Report for the Ministerial Council on Energy Smart Meter Working Group. Sydney, Australia: NERA 
Economic Consulting. September 2007. 
 
NERA (2008). Cost benefit analysis of smart metering and direct load control: Overview Report for 
Consultation. Report for the Ministerial Council on Energy Smart Meter Working Group. Sydney, 
Australia: NERA Economic Consulting. 29 February 2008. 
 
Neuhoff, Karsten (2007). Targets, prices and other policy instruments. Slides from Electricity Policy 
Research Group Winter Seminar 2007, Cambridge. 
 
NIAUR (2007). NIE Supply Price Control: Proposals for Consultation. August 2007. Northern Ireland 
Authority for Utility Regulation. Belfast. 
 
NIE (n.d.). Using a Keypad Meter. Northern Ireland Electricity Energy. Accessed 22 August 2008: 
http://www.nieenergy.co.uk/keypad.php#q10  
 
Nordgren, Erik (2008). Vattenfall Eldistribution AB, Sweden: Project AMR – Automatic Meter Reading. 
Slides from Toveiskommunikasjon i Norge 2008. 21 May 2008, Gardemoen, Oslo. 
  
OEB (2005). Smart meter implementation plan. Ontario Energy Board. Report of the Board to the 
Minister. January 26, 2005. 
 
Ofgem (2001). Ofgem’s strategy for metering: A consultation paper.  March 2001. Office of Gas and 
Electricity Markets. London. Available from 
http://ofgem2.ulcc.ac.uk/temp/ofgem/cache/cmsattach/2105_28_metering.pdf?wtfrom=/ofgem/work/
index.jsp&section=/areasofwork/metering  
 
Ofgem (2005). Prepayment meters: consultation on new powers under the Energy Act 2004 and update 
on recent developments. February 2005. Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. London. Available from 
http://www.ofgem.gov.uk/Sustainability/SocAction/Monitoring/PPMRegMon/Documents1/9604-
3205.pdf  
 
Ofgem (2006a). Domestic metering innovation. Consultation document. Ref: 20/06. 1st of February 2006. 
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. London. Available from 
http://ofgem2.ulcc.ac.uk/temp/ofgem/cache/cmsattach/13745_2006.pdf?wtfrom=/ofgem/work/index.j
sp&section=/areasofwork/metering  
 
 70 
Ofgem (2006b). Metering price control review. Consultation document. Ref: 108/06. 30 June 2006. 
Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. London. Available from 
http://ofgem2.ulcc.ac.uk/temp/ofgem/cache/cmsattach/15593_metering_price_control_con_doc_V7-
final.pdf?wtfrom=/ofgem/work/index.jsp&section=/areasofwork/metering  
 
Ofgem (2006c). Ofgem’s Decision on the Future of the Gas and Electricity Metering Price Controls. 
Decision document. Ref: 187/06. 13 October 2006. Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. London. 
Available from http://www.ofgem.gov.uk/Markets/RetMkts/Metrng/Metering/Documents1/15725-
187_06.pdf  
 
Ofgem (2006d). Domestic Metering Innovation – Next Steps. Decision document. Ref: 107/06. 30 June 
2006. Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. London. Available from 
http://www.ofgem.gov.uk/Markets/RetMkts/Metrng/Smart/Documents1/14527-
Metering%20Innovation_Decision%20document_final.pdf 
 
Ofgem (2007). Supply Licence Review – Final Proposals. Decision document. Ref: 128/07. 1 June 2007. 
London: Office of Gas and Electricty Markets. Available from: 
http://www.ofgem.gov.uk/Markets/RetMkts/Compl/SLR/Documents1/SLR%20Final%20Proposals%20De
cision%20Doc.pdf  
 
Oland, Gunn (2005). Demand response resources: Nordic regulatory aspects. Slides from IEA Demand 
response resources workshop. April 25, 2005. Oslo, Norway. 
 
Owen, Jill and Ward, J. (2006). Smart meters: Commercial, policy and regulatory drivers. Sustainability 
First, March 2006. London. 
 
Owen, Jill and Ward, J. (2007). Smart meters in Great Britain: the next steps? Sustainability First, July 
2007. London. 
 
PG&E (2005).  Updated preliminary AMI business case: Analysis of Pacific Gas and Electric Company 
(U39-E). March 15, 2005. San Francisco. 
 
PG&E (2008). PG&E seeks to upgrade SmartMeter Technology to enhance customer, operational 
benefits. News Release. January 17 2008. Pacific Gas & Electric News Department. San Francisco. 
Available from http://www.pge.com/about/news/mediarelations/newsreleases/q1_2008/080117.shtml  
 
Power UK (2008). National Grid fined £41 million. Power UK. Issue 169. 18 March 2008. Accessed via 
Factiva, 03 September 2008. 
 
PRI (n.d.). Northern Ireland Keypad Trial – A Case Study. Polymeters Response International. Available 
from http://www.pri.co.uk/page102.html 
 
 71 
PRIME (2008). Technology White Paper: PHY Layer Specification. Powerline Related Intelligent Metering 
Evolution project. 15 February 2008. Available from 
http://www.iberdrola.es/wcorp/gc/en/doc/PHY_Spec_White_Paper.pdf  
 
Roberts (2008). Update on Advanced Metering fro California’s Large Utilities. CEC Workshop on 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure. May 27, 2008. Available from: 
http://www.energy.ca.gov/load_management/documents/2008-05-
27_workshop/presentations/3_(CPUC,%20T.Roberts)_Update_on_Advanced_Metering_for_Californias_
Large_Utilities.pdf  
 
SCE (2005). Testimony supporting application for approval of advanced metering infrastructure 
deployment strategy and cost recovery mechanism: Volume 1 – Business Vision, Management 
Philosophy, and Summary of Business Case Analysis. Before the Public Utilities Commission of the State 
of California. Rosemead, California. March 30, 2005. 
 
SCE (2007). Edison Smartconnect deployment funding and cost recovery: Financial assessment and cost 
benefit analysis. Before the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. Rosemead, California. 
December 5, 2007. 
 
SenterNovem (2005). Recommendation: Implementing smart metering infrastructure for small-scale 
customers. SenterNovem 4150. Utrecht. October 2005. 
 
Spees, Kathleen and Lave, Lester B. (2007). Demand response and electricity market efficiency. 
Electricity Journal 20 (3): 69-85. 
 
Stadler, Ingo (2008). Power grid balancing of energy systems with high renewable energy penetration by 
demand response. Utilities Policy 16 (2008): 90-98. 
 
Stoft, S. (2002). Power system economics: Designing markets for electricity. IEEE Press. Picastaway, N.J. 
 
Strbac, Goran, Jenkins, Nick and Green, Tim (2006). Future Network Technologies: Report to DTI. April 
2006. Available from: http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file31649.pdf  
 
Verivox (2008). RWE startet ersten flächendeckenden Einsatz von intelligenten Zähler in Deutschland. 19 
February 2008. Available from 
http://www.verivox.de/News/ArticleDetails.asp?aid=74493&pm=1    
 
Vigneron, Jean (2007). Development of a 35 million points AMM system at EDF – Basics. Slides from 
CIRED Conference, 21-24 May 2007, Vienna, Austria. 
 
Villa, Ferruccio (2008). The Italian experience in regulating smart metering. Slides from Energyforum – 
Smart metering European opportunities and solutions. Amsterdam, 27-28 February 2008. 
 72 
 
Wood, G., and Newborough, M. (2007). Influencing user behaviour with energy information display 
systems for intelligent homes. International Journal of Energy Research. 2007, 31: 56-78. 
 
Wood, G. and Newborough, M. (2003). Dynamic energy-consumption indicators for domestic 
appliances: environment, behaviour and design. Energy and Buildings. Volume 35, Issue 8: 821-841. 
 
Wissner, Matthias and Growitsch, Christian (2007). Die Liberalisierung des Zähl- und Messwesens. 
Wissenschaftliches Institut für Infrastruktur und Kommunikationsdienste (WIK). July 2007, Bad Honnef. 
 
Yello Strom (2008). Yello Strom setzt beim Sparzähler online auf Microsoft-Technologie. Press Release, 3 
March 2008, Hannover. Available from 
http://www.yellostrom.de/presse/deutsch/pressemitteilungen/2008/kooperation-yello-
microsoft/index.html?start=2002  
 
Zhang, Tao and Nuttall, William (2007). An agent based simulation of smart metering technology 
adoption. Cambridge Working Papers in Economics CWPE 0760/ Electricity Policy Research Group 
Working Paper EPRG 0727. 
 

